CHAPTER 4
The Wayfarer

UCSD sprawled across a mesa overlooking the Pacific Ocean. The only thing I remember from orientation was a student guide telling us, "Find your balance." If you'd told me that this sun-bleached campus would put me on horseback in Mongolia within a few years, I'd have thought you were crazy.

I declared aerospace engineering as my major, "rocket science," sure difficulty itself could prove something. But once classes started I found myself slipping into anything but my degree: opera, philosophy, geophysics, modern world history. Part of it was motivated by the unfortunate case that there were not many women in engineering at the time, so wandering into other departments served multiple purposes. It was a time of expansion. Suddenly I could invent myself in any form.

On a personal level I was thriving. For the first time I had a large crew of friends, kids from around the country who'd arrived in Southern California, all of us starting our lives on our own terms. We'd build bonfires at night and attempt to surf under a full moon. I was building my adult life out of the still smoldering ashes of my parents' divorce.

By my second year I'd found my way into Mark Meyers's lab. He'd brushed me off at first, but I kept showing up, sweeping floors, and polishing microscope samples until he let me stay for what eventually became a master's and a PhD. Meyers ran his students like a military unit, storming in each morning with a sadistic joy at eight sharp saying, "Where are my little rabbits? The old fox is here!" He'd disappear for weeks at a time, unannounced, and come back with a bloodied bag of piranha teeth on our desks. "You should study this," he'd say while reveling at the sharpness held by the tiny natural blades.

Over the years my cohort of friends deepened and became family. Derek was my best friend, and deep into his Master of Fine Arts thesis in a new field he was determined to launch under the term *Funology*. "It's all about the power of play!" he would say with gleeful confidence. The campus was his laboratory. He built a giant labyrinth of packing wrap in the forest behind the faculty club, complete with a hammock garden hidden inside where a projector played *Baraka* on repeat. We lived in it for a week. When money got tight we'd forage like the books I had read as a kid. I fashioned a blowgun from lab supplies and hunted rabbits on the campus lawns. Just like with the labyrinth, Derek called it an "art project" to avoid uproar. Somehow a photo of me holding a rabbit and my blowgun ended up framed in the graduate advising office, a cautionary tale of what happens "when you go off the deep end."

One night we heard that changing water temperatures had resulted in destructive populations of Humboldt squid in San Diego waters, and that they grew to three to five feet long with beaks like wire cutters. "Food!" We pooled our tiny stipends to buy spots on a community fishing boat for the night run. The squid came up out of the dark toward our glow stick lures, pale and ghostly in their swirls. One by one they piled into the boat, tentacles flopping everywhere. We carried them home in clear bags, beaks and dinner-plate eyeballs pressed against the plastic, and laid them out in our shared graduate kitchen. Months of ramen and eggs were about to be replaced with glorious calamari steaks the size of T-bones. Hours later, the kitchen drowning in guts and ink, we took our first bite. Something was wrong. A quick search of the internet explained that the only proper way to prepare Humboldt squid was to "put it in the driveway, drive over it repeatedly, throw it away, and eat the tire." I can only imagine what the graduate housing community thought, walking past clear garbage bags with giant eyeballs staring out.

But amidst all the shenanigans we were forming ourselves into scientists. You pick up something nobody has bothered to look at closely, and you look at it closely. Each friend had their own curiosities, from philosophy to computer science. We were a band of misfits, venturing into our own frontiers, and the energy of that was intoxicating.

---

Yet while my intellectual mind was expanding in every direction, something primal was pulling at me from below. I'd been the earthquake kid, the Cambridge kid, the Palo Alto kid, now the college kid. I could study the atomic structure of self-assembling materials under an electron microscope, but I still had the confusing wounds of my ancestors. *Why did I feel the way I did at a human level?* I'd ask myself in my more existential moments.

I had already seen so much transformation, the world in entropy all around me. How did I fit into all that?

That winter, my mother, after a lifetime of sacrifice and nothing but a fractured family to show for it, decided it was time to reconnect her worlds. She gathered her now grown kids for a trip to Hong Kong, to the side of the family we barely knew.

We arrived to piles of red envelopes filled with cash, one for every Chinese New Year we'd been away. My mother's parents lived in a 450-square-foot flat in one of Hong Kong's towering residential blocks, a space not much smaller than what had once held five siblings, a piano, and my uncle's chickens. Two dozen uncles, aunties, and cousins squeezed between unpainted walls that held decades of gathered memories, most of them unknown to me.

My Pó Pó (maternal grandmother) offered us sliced fruit and cookies and presented sweaters she'd knitted "for two weeks straight until she vomited," my mother loudly translated. I didn't know how to respond to this expression of a dormant love.

My Mandarin had rusted from disuse. It didn't matter anyway, people in Hong Kong spoke Cantonese, and some English. My mother had only used Mandarin with us in our earliest years, betting on its long-term usefulness. But even with limited words, being there felt like something waking up from within. People looked like me, they behaved and moved like my mother. The mannerisms and views I'd grown up with in our California home, the respect she had longed for from us, they suddenly made sense.

Then I re-met my Gong Gong (maternal grandfather), deeply aged but carrying himself with a gentle dignity. I had seen him once, when I was just a little boy. His slow, deliberate English became a bridge to the whole side of my story I'd been cut off from. He would pause between each word, in a staccato cadence. "I - am - glad - you - came..." One afternoon, sitting in that tiny living room with the towers of Hong Kong pressing in from every window, he told me about his life.

He'd been a student when the Japanese bombers came. He remembered walking across a thousand miles of war-torn China to find his family, arriving nearly dead of dysentery. I listened as he described crossing Europe on foot years later, after covering the signing of the Geneva Accords. He had been a photojournalist for the only English-translated newspapers out of Hong Kong during the war. He had met my grandmother while she was a wartime nurse in the ruins of Nanking. As he told me his stories I could see the weight of lived memories in his eyes.

Then, out of the blue, he pointed to his lower back. He said our family all had the "blue spot," a birthmark that recedes a few years after birth. A sign, he said, of an ancient heritage often referred to as the Mongolian spot.

"I had one!?" I looked at my mother, who nodded while peeling oranges for her mother. "You all did," she said half distracted and without emotion, treating the never-before-known fact of my childhood as nothing.

"We all come from somewhere far back," my grandfather jumped back in. He leaned forward with a half smile. "Maybe we come from the North."

---

We returned to Hong Kong for several winters after that, learning the dizzying maze of modernity and antiquity my mother had grown up in. Then one summer my brother Ed called. Always the first to go all in, he wanted to use money he'd saved day trading out of his Berkeley dorm room to buy us two tickets to Tibet. "I've long wanted to see the top of the world." That was when I saw the power of deciding just to go. It was also the first time I entered a living ancient world that had never really disappeared.

Months later we arrived in Lhasa, feeling the altitude in every ounce of our bodies. A woman on the street folded dumplings with the speed of an F1 pit crew, her hands a blur. Monks filed past effortlessly in saffron robes. I felt weak. We spent only a few days in the storied city, under the shadow of the Potala Palace before embarking on our goal, Everest Base Camp to look upon the world's tallest mountain with our own eyes. We had decided to trek the final passage to slowly acclimatize and earn our way there. A week later, through the most grueling walk I had ever known, where each step felt like a mountain, we stood at seventeen thousand feet in a makeshift village of food and tents beneath the highest point on earth.

"We call it Chomolungma," said a younger Sherpa boy I'd become friends with over the days we lived at basecamp. "Goddess Mother of the World." On our last night an enormous windstorm whipped through the camp, and we all rushed to tie down the ropes that held the canvas tarp roofs on the various canteens, half laughing and half grimacing. The next day we stumbled out of our tent to learn that a hiker we had shared tea with the night before had passed in her sleep from pulmonary edema, high-altitude sickness. My friend pressed a small medallion into my hand. It bore a Sanskrit symbol that looked like a number three with a hooked line extending from its back.

"Om," he said while running his fingers along its contours.

I wore it around my neck without understanding its significance. Back in San Diego, I'd find myself turning the medallion over in my hands between classes while contemplating how that world, now so far away, was still spinning without me. I would wonder what my friends there were doing in any given moment. It almost seemed like a dream.

---

The world had been opened for me by that journey my brother had created for us, and by the conversations that had sparked in my Gong Gong's home. The following summers the traveler in me was insatiable, anything I could do to earn money in the year was targeted toward plane tickets and the promise of the road at the end of classes, if Meyers agreed. My life began to feel like I was split between two existences, the one stuck at my desk and the one on wandering expeditions in search of roots.

The Mongolia trip where Bibi had become like a sister and Amaraa had become a sworn blood brother was the next summer. My Gong Gong's "North" had pointed the way. That trip would plant the seed of a quest that would chart the course of my adult life as an explorer. But before fully engaging in that journey, I wanted to see the lands I had read about in the journals of my dad's father.

---

So the next summer I returned to Asia, this time to retrace my forebears' journeys across the Silk Road. First, a few days in the North, standing as a groomsman at Amaraa's wedding, telling jokes about Boyz II Men through a translator to a hundred expressionless faces. Amaraa's laugh split the air in merciful solidarity. Then, when that was over, I headed west, along an ancient route that once connected the world.

I had read my grandfather's journals from when he had traveled through these lands many decades before, in the midst of war and revolutions. Now I traversed the ancient road.

Mosques flew by the bus window while the Tian Shan mountains rose above me. Kids with blond hair and hazel eyes ran through mud brick trading towns, their parents watching over them beneath felt hats. The monolithic China of my childhood shattered into a mosaic with each mile.

I got by with my adolescent Mandarin, which improved each day. China held hundreds of languages within it, fifty-six recognized ethnicities, dialects within dialects within mountains. But most had been forced to learn some Mandarin, and it was now a bridge to many worlds.

In a Uyghur market in the far west I met a French wayfarer, tall and wiry and gray-haired, his clothes patched and faded from decades on the road.

"I've spent twenty years drifting, never more than two months in the same place," he told me as we shared a meal under a string of fluorescent lights in the open air street market.

I told him about Mongolia. He told me about a village deep in the mountains of central China where people still lived in traditional tree houses. But there was something melancholic about his solitude, a life spent searching but never landing. I wondered: if I wasn't careful, could this be my fate?

I continued further west to Kashgar, an ancient city where China meets Pakistan and Afghanistan. Had my grandpa been here? I had romantic notions of buying a camel and riding into the desert. The overnight bus took eleven hours, the driver hurling down backroads at terrifying speeds while speakers blasted 1980s Arabic music.

I found myself on the Karakoram Highway, the road tracing the highest passages of the ancient Silk Road. Disguised as a Chinese student I slipped into Pakistan for a second just to say I had been there. It was unexpected, sharing a sip of whiskey with a border guard in an empty mountain crossing at fifteen thousand feet, then walking back across the white line in the road that separated one country from another.

That night, back in town, I went to a small restaurant with travelers from the hostel and some local Kazakh friends I'd made. We were playing foosball and drinking beer when three young Uyghur men confronted us. At first I thought it was about the beer, suddenly realizing our ignorant disrespect of Ramadan. But it was more than that. I looked Han Chinese, the majority group whose migration into this land had long fueled resentment. They walked past the other friends and went for me. That same morning I'd used my Han appearance to slip past the border guards. To the people who lived here, those features carried the baggage of centuries of conflict.

Before I knew what was going on they had cornered me against a wall. My fight-or-flight reflex kicked in and I grabbed one by the neck and shoved him back three steps. The restaurant manager burst in shouting, scattering us like flies. But my Kazakh friends warned they might come back with knives. I left the city the next morning, still trembling.

Rattled from the experience I headed south the next day. Through the window of a train car China transformed beneath me, from snow-covered peaks to rolling rice terraces, until I found myself in a village called Dali, nestled in the mountains of Yunnan.

Foggy cobblestone streets, terracotta roofs, red lanterns. But alongside the ancient architecture was a subculture of young Chinese rebels who had walked away from the relentless grind of expectation in favor of folk music and poetry and cheap rice wine.

I walked into a small bar with jars of vodka infusions ranging from lichee to kimchi stacked on rustic wooden shelves. The bartender had a *Pulp Fiction* haircut, a stern face, and wore all black.

I took a seat in the corner and pulled out my journal to write through what had happened days before. I had been targeted for a history I didn't really know, and I had shoved one of them against a wall. But then again so had they, carrying out the pains of histories from generations long ago. Whose grievance was older? Did it matter? And for a minute I had been pulled into it, ready to absorb the anger that wasn't mine. Was this how race riots emerge?

The bartender eventually acknowledged me with a nod, and as I tried to order a drink she cut me off and said, "Why aren't you speaking Mandarin?"

Her name was Maya. Attraction is rarely a single look or gesture, more the mystery of a person. Instantly I was drawn in, her punk-rock persona mixed into an earnestness about authenticity. She scolded me for drinking cold water, and it was like stepping into a part of my own culture I had only known through family, only now it was through the vessel of two beautiful dark eyes looking at me seemingly annoyed and amused at the same time.

Every time I stumbled and switched to English, she refused. "You're Chinese, look at your face." But when a Frenchman walked in and ordered in English, she responded in a perfectly California accent. It was just me that she was demanding Mandarin from. That felt great. She was holding me in her contempt.

Over the next two weeks, she introduced me to a community of young Chinese castaways I had no idea existed. They were artistic, passionate, independent, nothing like the obedient archetype that the world portrayed of this culture. They had rejected the competition and expectation in favor of this little enclave where they played heartfelt guitar riffs in smoky rooms as the music floated into the streets that had been paved six hundred years before. In the evenings we cooked meals that tasted of my mother's cooking, but these were made over coals. It felt so natural.

Maya and I fell together quickly. One night she gave me a haircut in her tiny apartment, a minimalist room with blank walls and nothing but a mattress on the floor. She made vegetables and rice on a portable propane burner while I showered off weeks of road grime. We spent the night together, and I lost myself in words from my native tongue. The words shaped the feeling, and the feeling reshaped the words. I was experiencing love in a language I'd never used for it, unlocking a version of me I hadn't known. I spoke Mandarin daily after that, the connections becoming stronger. Eventually it was even in my dreams.

I was in a parallel life, the one I would have been living had my great-grandfather not left for North America a hundred years before. The longer I stayed, the more real that parallel became and the harder it was to remember my other reality. Kind of like the song *Hotel California*, but in Dali.

One day Maya took my hand and led me to a lake surrounded by rice fields so green they looked painted. We found an abandoned fishing boat, which she insisted on "borrowing," and rowed to the middle. She could sense the conflict in me, that I was already beginning to pull away even though so much of me wanted to stay. My time was almost up before I was supposed to go back to classes, and Meyers, and all that I had committed to on the other side of the planet. Did that version still need me?

"Look at these mountains," she said. "They've been here for millions of years. Our worries, they're superficial. You will come and go. I will come and go. We will be long gone. And yet these mountains will still be standing here." That was Maya. She'd spend an hour brutally teasing me about my accent, then drop something like that without blinking.

On my last night, an international group of musicians staged a concert in one of Dali's ancient gatehouses, the towering stone structures that had once been built to keep outsiders from entering the city. Now the gates were thrown open and people from everywhere danced inside them, drums and didgeridoos echoing off walls that had repelled invaders for centuries. Maya and I had agreed to work the tickets and bar. I needed any cash I could get to finish off the trip. It was blissful to ignore what was coming, but the truth wouldn't wait.

I thought of the French wayfarer in the North, his twenty years of drifting, the loneliness in his eyes. I didn't want that. I had a half-finished degree, friends, a lab with an old fox who expected all his rabbits back in a week. I had another life.

We fought. I stood on the cobblestones under her window in the rain, flicking rocks at the glass. Finally, a text: "If you're going to leave, just leave." I boarded the bus at 5 AM, slid in my headphones and pulled my hood up, then sobbed the entire way while the other passengers stared. I was abandoning a version of myself that felt like it had been waiting to be awoken, one I would probably never find again. What was I doing?

Two tortured days later, I arrived in a train station hundreds of miles away wondering if I had made the right choice. Then my phone buzzed.

"Hey California, why are there so many dogs in this train station?"

I looked up and there she was! She'd bought a plane ticket to intercept me. We ran into each other's arms. "I understand you have to go, but I couldn't let us part like that," she said, kissing me in the square as the dogs barked and chased each other.

For the next two nights, on a rooftop overlooking the camelback mountains of Guilin, whose layers fade into the mist like memories with time, she taught me to meditate. "Quiet the mind and let the horizon come to you instead of chasing it."

On our last morning she handed me a book. "You should read this," she said. The cover read *Siddhartha*. The story of a man who searches the world for meaning, and discovers, at the end, that everything he sought was already inside him.

Before I flew home, I had one last beat of the journey to make. I followed the French wayfarer's directions into the mountains of central China. I traveled for days into remote terrain. Train, bus, the back of a motorcycle. I found the hamlet he'd described, a cluster of traditional tree houses in a forest above the clouds. I had no plan, so I sat in a rice field playing my guitar as the sun set. A few kids came over. Most of them spoke Miao, a language as distinct from Mandarin as the Uyghur I'd heard in the far west. A ten-year-old girl who had been taught Mandarin appointed herself as my translator.

She and her friends brought me to the one-room tree house where her family lived. Her mother and auntie in black dresses with colorful triangle patterns, her father squatting in all black with a long powder-loaded rifle, smoking a pipe. They fed me vegetables from their farm and tilapia excessively covered in salt as a gesture of generosity. I was handed a fermented drink that tasted like old gym socks and did my best with it. We played music together on a small wooden flute. That night we all slept in the hut on stilts, pigs sleeping in the farm below, a wood fire burning in a giant dish in the center. It felt just like the gers of the steppe, a clan huddled together in each other's warmth.

I was beginning to awaken parts of me that had been hidden. The cultures were different, but I kept feeling something underneath them that wasn't. Mongolia, Yunnan, the wayfarer, this tree house. How could I be all those things?

As I drifted off, reading the first pages of the book Maya had given me, my phone buzzed. A text from my roommate in San Diego: fires were sweeping through Southern California, everyone was being evacuated, they'd packed my things. While I'd been searching for who I was on the other side of the world, the life I'd left behind had been stuffed in a box and nearly burned to a crisp.
