Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:15 Page Number: 179

8 The Enigma of Mind: A Theory of

Evolution and Conscious Experience
A L BE RT Y.-M . L IN AN D J . DE RE K L O M A S 1

Introduction
In July 2011, while surveying the buried remains of a cluster of fourteenthcentury ceremonial structures in the remote mountains of Northern
Mongolia – in the heart of a region known as the Ich Korig (the
‘Forbidden Zone’), and at the base of a mountain believed to be the historic
Burkhan Khaldun, or ‘God Mountain’ – my team and I encountered a
group of seven Mongolian shamans who had come on pilgrimage to
commune with that very location. We had travelled for three days by
horseback and heavy four-wheel-drive trucks through the rugged wilderness. Amidst rains and mudslides, we forded swollen rivers to get to the
mountain. Foreigners have been restricted from this speciﬁc location for
over 800 years by decree of Genghis Khan himself, and even though we
were operating with special permissions from the Ministry of Culture, that
night I was summoned to meet the head shaman in a moment of reckoning.
Field notes July 18th, 2011, 12:50 am – I will struggle to ﬁnd the words
to describe what I just experienced and although I will surely fail to do it
justice, I must try. My heart beat loudly in my throat as the hammer fell
upon the drum, its rhythm pounded through the air, like waves through
the thick fog. As the sunlight hit the amber tone the mist began to rise
from the knoll above our camp. The shaman had summoned me, Ishdorj
had guided me to sit next to him, and to recite the respected words that
sounded like ‘amaraa sanbano uhau’. I was terriﬁed I would not say them

1

Note to the reader: as this chapter deals directly with conscious experience, we
take the unconventional approach of weaving between ﬁrst-person accounts and a
collaborative scholarly discussion. The ﬁrst-person accounts are told from Albert
Lin’s perspective.

179

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:15 Page Number: 180

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

correctly. The beat moved faster, then faster still until it almost seemed
like a constant burst of energy.
Then the shaman, cloaked with a black facial mask of thick cloth
covering his eyes, rose to his feet and spun in circles, slamming his
hammer into the drum in an explosion of sound, his long cords of cloth
(blue, black, white, maroon) spun in the air around him. And then,
suddenly, silence. He dropped to the ground in a sitting position and
leaned forward while jerking his head back and forth like a crow. His voice
grunted low, in spurts of three. As if he were clearing his throat, but also
as if he were agreeing with some internal message. ‘Unch, unch, unch.’

Throughout my life I have had the great privilege of travelling the
world and, upon reﬂection, I realise that I have encountered aspects of
shamanism in many distant cultures. For instance, deep within the Paciﬁc
Ocean on the island of Pohnpei – home to the capital of Micronesia – we
obtained permission to enter and apply aerial LIDAR to survey the
enigmatic archaeological site of Nan Madol through our participation in
a tribal ceremony with the Nahnmwarki (High Chief ) of the Madol En Inal
clan. Like most ceremonies in this oceanic culture, it began with the sacred
and mind-altering sakau2 drink ‘to commune with the spirits’. This tradition of ritual altered states is so embedded into the cultural story of the
Paciﬁc that not only are sakau pounding stones found within the heart of
the ancient megalithic city of Nan Madol (an artiﬁcial island complex built
c. 1180 AD3), but the tradition is also within the modern ﬂag of Pohnpei –
which carries the sakau cup at its centre. One can easily imagine the
importance of rituals of the mind in building an oceanic society brave
enough to stand at the shore and harness the collective courage to set sail
towards an unknown horizon. To this day, the same bell-like sound – of
rock pounding against the sacred sakau stone – rings through mangroves
on islands across the Paciﬁc almost daily, summoning all within earshot to
begin the sacred ceremony.

2
3

Kava (piper methysticum).
M. D. McCoy, H. A. Alderson, R. Hemi, H. Cheng, and R. L. Edwards, ‘Earliest
direct evidence of monument building at the archaeological site of Nan Madol
(Pohnpei, Micronesia) identiﬁed using 230Th/U coral dating and geochemical
sourcing of megalithic architectural stone’, Quaternary Research, 86(3) (2016),
295–302.

180

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:15 Page Number: 181

The Enigma of Mind

Looking further back into our shared human story, while travelling
through Norway’s most northern tip, I was stunned by the magniﬁcent
Neolithic rock art at Alta. In a remarkable portrait of the emergence of
modern culture, thousands of images from as early as 4200 BC are carved
into the coastal bedrock of the Alta fjord. In the midnight sun, when long
shadows are cast over the subtle contours, I saw ancient representations
of human ingenuity, such as deep-sea ﬁshing, and representations of our
collective spiritual roots. The site’s UNESCO World Heritage designation describes the ‘exceptionally high number of human ﬁgures and
compelling portrayals of prehistoric social life, dancing, processions,
and rituals’. They seem to show ‘communication between the world of
the living and the worlds of the spirits [giving] insight into the cosmology of prehistoric hunters and gatherers’.4
All human cultures have developed technologies to shape and explore
our conscious experience: ritual, ceremony, art, music, and concoctions of
intoxication. These technologies of consciousness have been woven into
our societies, leaving temples and monuments in their wake. Why? How
have these consciousness-altering tools affected human evolution?
From Anthropology to Personal Experience
In the most unexpected way, my interest in the anthropological enigma
of consciousness intersected with my own personal evolution. Five years
after standing on Mongolia’s most sacred mountain, I found myself lying
in the dirt: blood pouring out of my leg, I had been crushed by the weight
of an overturned vehicle. Rushed to the hospital, I unwittingly embarked
upon a journey into the enigma of the mind.
The following month I endured the intense mental and physical pain of
an attempt at limb salvage. The repeated surgeries each brought rounds
of excruciating wound care, hours in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber, and
an intimacy with the overall experience of pain that I had not known
possible. Ultimately it didn’t work, and a ﬁnal surgery removed the
material aspects of a limb that had been a part of my mental body map
for over 36 years. But the imprint of the pain in my mind endured.
4

whc.unesco.org/en/list/352/.

181

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:15 Page Number: 182

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

I cannot recall if it was just moments or days after the amputation, but
gradually I began to notice a tingly sensation in my right foot – the one
that was no longer there. The phenomenon of phantom pain soon
followed. Burning, darting, pangs of pain, the sensation of every tendon,
ligament, and bone in my ankle and foot being repeatedly broken and lit
on ﬁre in waves of electric shock coursing through the air where my foot
once was. This pain was real, yet it occurred in a part of my body that
I rationally knew did not exist.
Serendipity’s hand revealed that I happened to work at the same
university campus as Dr V. S. Ramachandran, the man who literally
wrote the book on the phantom limb phenomenon.5 In our ﬁrst meeting,
he asked: “Do we really know where the body ends and the mind begins?”
A long-time distinguished professor at UC San Diego, ‘Rama’ had
developed the use of ‘mirror box therapy’. Placing a borderless mirror
between my legs, he could ‘trick’ my mind into seeing an illusion of a
functioning right leg in the reﬂection of the left. This experience permits
new (and less painful) memories to be created; memories to displace my
neural attachments to pain and trauma. The mirror box therapy was
uncanny: I could see my right toes wiggling again, a mirror image always
moving in synchrony with my left. It was comical but comforting;
somehow the visual experience in my mind gave me physical relief. Yet,
almost as soon as the mirror was removed, the pain would return. The
stubbornness of my mind (the ‘ego’ through which I perceive the world)
would not hold on to the new narrative I was attempting to tell my brain.
Now incapacitated by the weight of the mysterious ‘phantom pain’,
I needed to ﬁnd a solution. Suspecting that a lack of neuroplasticity could
be the culprit, I began exploring cognitive technologies that I had encountered throughout the world: Kundalini Yoga, chanting, meditation, sensory
deprivation ﬂoat tanks, among others. Finally, deep in the sand dunes of
Death Valley, I discovered that a single large dose of psilocybin or ‘magic
mushrooms’ – in conjunction with Ramachandran’s mirror therapy –
ﬁnally resolved my phantom limb pain in an enduring way. Somehow, the
ego-crushing power of the hallucinogenic experience enabled my brain to
5

V. S. Ramachandran and S. Blakeslee, Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of
the Human Mind (New York, NY: William Morrow & Co., 1998).

182

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:15 Page Number: 183

The Enigma of Mind

loosen up and accept the re-framed reality that the mirrors presented. This
case has now been published and a formal clinical trial of psilocybin in
phantom pain therapy is under way at UC San Diego, at the newly formed
Psychedelics and Health Research Initiative.6
In phantom limb pain, the mind is clearly capable of crafting realities
that extend beyond what we can rationally understand. No amount of
verbal explanation could convince my brain to let go of the pain it felt was
real. But then a few grams of entheogenic mushrooms facilitated an
experience so overwhelming that I lost my sense of self. In that moment
of communion with a vast cosmos, I was able to let go of the bounds of
prior truths and re-imagine a more harmonised state of existence. It was
similar to what Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi described as a ‘ﬂow state’.7 Had
I been more skilled, perhaps I could have achieved a comparable experience through meditation or another practice. So much evidence now
shows that psychedelics can increase neural plasticity that some scientists
have named these drugs ‘psychoplastogens’. But psilocybin doesn’t just
seem to create a biochemical effect – it isn’t aspirin. The experience itself
seems necessary for the beneﬁt of plasticity.8
Ramachandran once suggested that our species could more appropriately be named Homo plasticus because ‘lifelong plasticity’ is the ‘central
player in the evolution of human uniqueness’.9 In my case, psilocybin
augmented my plasticity, but I suspect that many non-drug-induced
states of consciousness could also produce neural plasticity.10 Perhaps
V. S. Ramachandran, C. Chunharas, Z. Marcus, T. Furnish, and A. Lin, ‘Relief from
intractable phantom pain by combining psilocybin and mirror visual-feedback
(MVF)’, Neurocase, 24(2) (2018), 105–110.
7
‘Flow is the way people describe their state of mind when consciousness is
harmoniously ordered’, M. Csikszentmihalyi and J. Nakamura, ‘Flow, altered
states of consciousness, and human evolution’, Journal of Consciousness Studies, 25
(11–12) (2018), 102–114.
8
C. Ly, A. C. Greb, L. P. Cameron, J. M. Wong, E. V. Barragan et al., ‘Psychedelics
promote structural and functional neural plasticity’, Cell Reports, 23(11) (2018),
3170–3182; N. R. P. W. Hutten, N. L. Mason, P. C. Dolder, E. L. Theunissen,
F. Holze et al., ‘Low doses of LSD acutely increase BDNF blood plasma levels in
healthy volunteers’, ACS Pharmacology & Translational Science, 4(2) (2021),
461–466.
9
V. S. Ramachandran, The Tell-Tale Brain: A Neuroscientist’s Quest for What Makes Us
Human (New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Co., 2011).
10
In 2019, Robert Turner, director at the Max Planck Institute for Human
Cognitive and Brain Sciences in Leipzig, Germany, published a new theory
6

183

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:15 Page Number: 184

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

even the shamanic experience I encountered in the ‘Forbidden Zone’ was
accompanied by a similar kind of neural transformation?

Human Experience, Evolution, and Design
I now wish to introduce my co-author, Dr James Derek Lomas, a
professor at Delft University of Technology. As a cognitive scientist,
designer, and philosopher, he explores human experience from within the
ﬁeld of human-centred design. Over the last decade, Dr Lomas has been
my closest friend and intellectual partner. The journey I described above
was largely accompanied by our conversations surrounding consciousness and its many augmentations. Throughout our adventures together
we have explored the intersection of human experience, technology, and
philosophy. The present chapter shares the culmination of our discussions about the role of conscious experience in evolution – and for this, we
will now transition from a ﬁrst-person narrative into a joint discussion.

Darwinism in the Mind
‘It is a great honor to have been invited to give the ﬁrst Darwin Lecture
at Darwin College, in Cambridge, which of all universities is most closely
connected with Charles Darwin and the Darwin family.’
So began the philosopher Karl Popper in the inaugural Darwin
Lecture, ‘Natural Selection and the Emergence of Mind’.11 In his accompanying book chapter, Popper proposed a new idea: that the evolutionary
forces of natural selection were actually operating within the conscious
mind. He called this ‘the greatest marvel of our universe’. As an example,
regarding the role of neural plasticity in ritual experiences. He suggested that
dramatic rituals could help catalyse equally dramatic consolidation in neural
pathways, particularly when involving rhythmic entrainment. See R. Turner,
‘Finding likeness: Neural plasticity and ritual experience’, Anthropology Today, 35
(3) (2019), 3–6.
11
Karl Popper is well known for his advocacy of falsiﬁability in the sciences – that
hypotheses must be able to be proven false – but he also said that ‘the theory of
natural selection could be untestable (as is a tautology) and yet of great scientiﬁc
interest’. Popper additionally said, ‘the doctrine of natural selection is a most
successful metaphysical research program’. See K. Popper, ‘Natural selection and
the emergence of mind’, Dialectica, 32 (1978), 339–355.

184

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:15 Page Number: 185

The Enigma of Mind

Popper described how Albert Einstein generated an ‘immense number of
hypotheses’ and then rejected the vast majority, in a process of evolutionary natural selection. As another example of evolution through natural
selection, Popper described his own experience of writing: both writing
many words and crossing many out. He then evoked the image of an
artist, painting out spots of colour before reﬂecting whether to keep the
strokes or paint over them again. For Popper, this was the everyday
nature of evolutionary forces manifesting in the mind – the experience of
evolution. He proposed that evolutionary forces occur within three
‘mutually interacting’ worlds: the physical world, the world of experience,
and the world of artefacts.
We now wish to further consider Popper’s notion of evolutionary
forces in human experience and extend the idea to more extreme and
ancient human circumstances. We are inspired by Popper’s call for
‘intellectual daring in the search for truth’ while remembering his caution
to avoid making claims about ultimate questions, riddles of existence, or
humanity’s task in this world. We humbly seek to understand how
conscious experience might relate to evolutionary theory and are motivated by the very same question that motivates all thinking on the topic of
evolution: how did we arrive at the world we see today?

Summary: A Theory of Evolutionary Forces in the Mind
The elegant sculpting power of natural selection is not limited to genetic
systems.12 Instead, evolutionary ﬁtness forces are expected to emerge
within any system that has three key properties: variation, replication,
and selection. To understand the operation of evolution in the mind, we
will review three properties of experience that seem to satisfy these three
requirements of evolutionary theory. There may be many properties of
experience that can support variation, replication, and selection, but we
focus on the following: (1) variation via imagination, (2) replication via
sympathy, and (3) selection via harmonisation.

12

R. Bonduriansky and T. Day, ‘Nongenetic inheritance and its evolutionary implications’, Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 40 (2009), 103–125.

185

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:15 Page Number: 186

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

We begin with the topic of human imagination as an important source
for diversity and variety in the human mind. After reviewing key archeological milestones in the development of the creative imagination, we
reﬂect on the curious cultural ubiquity of shamanistic practices and
consider the basic drive for altering consciousness. We suggest that
altered states of consciousness may facilitate neural plasticity and produce
increased variation in the imagination. If so, then the uneven geographical
distribution of psychoactive plants may have inﬂuenced the diversity of
human culture, both in the recent past and deep into prehistory.13
After imagination, we suggest that the human capacity for sympathy
plays an important role in the replication of conscious experiences between
people. Speciﬁcally, we consider the theory that sympathetic resonance serves
as a prelinguistic mechanism for the replication of conscious experience
from one person to the next. The capacity to replicate feelings through
sympathetic resonance may have emerged even prior to deliberate human
imitation. Ramachandran’s theory regarding the role of ‘mirror neurons’ in
cultural evolution is one description of how neural resonance might create
the capacity to share mental states and experiences across people and time.
With evidence from recent multi-person brain-imaging ‘hyperscanning’
studies, we link the profoundly rhythmic nature of the human brain to the
reproduction of experiences between people – through resonance. Finally,
we give examples of cultural forms that may have evolved to maximise
human resonance and sympathy, such as Mayan bloodletting ceremonies.
Having introduced sources for the variation and replication of experience,
we then consider processes that might govern Darwinian selection forces in
the mind, namely within the competition for attention. In what might be
described as an integration of Platonism with evolutionary theory, we focus
on harmonisation as a selection pressure and ﬁtness function in the mind. Both
Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace gave descriptions of this ‘harmony’ in
natural selection. We show how this classical concept plays a role in the
mind, both as a metaphor and as a mechanism. We then summarise the
powerful role that harmony has played in empirical science, past and present.

13

For current distribution maps of peyote cactus (Lophophora williamsii), ﬂy agaric
mushroom (Amanita muscaria) and mushrooms of the genus Psilocybe, see © Open
Street Map and GBIF contributors www.gbif.org/.

186

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:15 Page Number: 187

The Enigma of Mind

In the end, we hope to have brought new detail to Popper’s fascinating
link between evolution and conscious experience. Are these ideas practical? We conclude by considering how new technologies and cultural
practices might build upon these principles to support a more positive
and resilient human future. To illustrate this very possibility, Dr Albert
Lin shares a ﬁnal ﬁrst-person account of his journey to a secret mystical
temple within the heart of the jungles of the Yucatán peninsula.
The Mind and Evolution
Despite living thousands of miles apart, Charles Darwin (1809–1882) and
Alfred Russel Wallace (1823–1913) each independently discovered the
principles of evolution. Darwin wrote ‘I never saw a more striking coincidence.’14 Both Darwin and Wallace also considered the role of the human
mind in evolution, with Wallace suggesting that ‘it may well be that
evolution is a fundamental law of the universe of mind as well as that of
matter’.15 It is this enigma that we investigate: the nature of evolutionary
forces operating within the realm of the conscious mind – and how evolution
in the mind manifests itself in the remarkable diversity of human cultures.
Imagination, Variation, and Human Evolution
Darwin and Wallace agreed that once humans developed certain mental
abilities, evolution would no longer affect the body so strongly, but that
evolution would continue within the mind. Indeed, while Homo sapiens
emerged between 350,000 and 260,000 years ago,16 the earliest known
representational cave painting, found in Indonesia, dates to 43,000 BC.17
The ﬁrst known European representational art dates to 35,000 BC and
C. Darwin, A. R. Wallace, G. Sarton, C. Lyell, and J. D. Hooker, ‘Discovery of the
theory of natural selection’, Isis, 14(1) (1930), 133–154.
15
A. R. Wallace, ‘The harmony of spiritualism and science’, Light (25 July 1885).
16
C. M. Schlebusch, H. Malmström, T. Günther, P. Sjödin, A. Coutinho et al.,
‘Southern African ancient genomes estimate modern human divergence to
350,000 to 260,000 years ago’, Science, 358(6363) (2017), 652–655.
17
This painting was discovered not far from where Wallace ﬁrst experienced the
incredible insight of evolution through natural selection. See A. Brumm, A. A.
Oktaviana, B. Burhan, B. Hakim, R. Lebe et al., ‘Oldest cave art found in Sulawesi’,
Science Advances, 7(3) (2021), article eabd4648.
14

187

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:15 Page Number: 188

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

the earliest discovered in Africa dates to about 30,000 BC.18 Thus, while
the human body evolved in Africa and dispersed across the world, it
seems that evolution in the mind took place in locations all around the
world. What evolved, in each case, seems to be a profound awakening in
the human capacity for imagination.
The archeological record can indicate key threshold events in the
evolution of the imagination.19 For instance, the Löwenmensch or
Lion-Man sculpture (c. 35,000 BC) (as depicted earlier in this volume in
Figure 1.1) clearly shows evidence of mentally synthesising human and
animal parts in the imagination and carving them into reality. The
emergence of ‘synthetic imagination’ seems to have given humans the
capacity to mentally model different objects and consider their combination through trial and error in the mind alone. This novel capacity for
synthetic imagination relies on the ability to literally synchronise different object-encoding neural circuits together – a process known as
prefrontal synthesis.
Once humans could play around with combinations of objects in their
mind, rather than through physical manipulation, cultural evolution may
have accelerated dramatically. Complex artefacts like boats (enabling the
peopling of Australasia), traps (for killing the soon-to-be-extinct megafauna), or other game-changing tools and techniques could now be
imagined. These factors alone would create an enormous evolutionary
advantage. But the emergence of the Synthetic Imagination also seemed
to enable activities with much less obvious beneﬁt for Palaeolithic
humans, like rituals, ceremonial burial, music, and art.
Near the discovery of the Löwenmensch, researchers uncovered the
highly sexualised Venus of Hohle Fels (Figure 8.1) and the earliest
known bone ﬂutes (Figure 8.2), found just 70 cm apart.20 This set of

18

R. Ego, Visionary Animal: Rock Art from Southern Africa, trans. D. Dusinberre
(Johannesburg: Wits University Press, 2019).
A. Vyshedskiy, ‘Neuroscience of imagination and implications for human evolution’, Current Neurobiology, 10(2) (2019), 89–109.
20
N. J. Conard, ‘A female ﬁgurine from the basal Aurignacian of Hohle Fels Cave in
southwestern Germany’, Nature, 459(7244) (2009), 248–252; N. J. Conard, M.
Malina, and S. C. Münzel, ‘New ﬂutes document the earliest musical tradition in
southwestern Germany’, Nature, 460(7256) (2009), 737–740.
19

188

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:15 Page Number: 189

The Enigma of Mind

F I G U R E 8 . 1 The Venus of Hohle Fels. Photo: Hilde Jensen. Copyright:

Universität Tübingen.

artefacts shows the emergence of a capability to shape the material
environment for the purpose of evoking experiences in other people.21
These magniﬁcent artifacts do not serve a practical purpose as a spear
or a ﬂint would, but instead describe an awakening of the artist in our
human nature, an aspect of the mind that is driven by our uniquely
existential consciousness.

21

The much older use of ochre may also be evidence of this. See T. Hodgskiss, ‘Ochre
use in the middle stone age’, in Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Anthropology
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020), online.

189

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:16 Page Number: 190

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

F I G U R E 8 . 2 The Flute of Hohle Fels. Photo: Hilde Jensen. Copyright:

Universität Tübingen.

Does the birth of the artist in humanity coincide with the evolution of
spirituality in human culture? Or is the art simply the evidence of a far
more ancient set of spiritual practices? This brings us to shamanism, an
ancient and mysterious phenomenon associated with the performative
induction of spiritual experiences in the mind.

190

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:16 Page Number: 191

The Enigma of Mind

Shamanism, Altered States and Diversity in the
Human Imagination
The term ‘shaman’ comes from the Siberian Tungus people.22 But it is used
to describe phenomena that are present in practically all cultures around
the world, ancient and modern,23 where altered states of consciousness are
used to conduct divinatory work, prayer, healing, or other soul journeys,
manipulations, or transformations. Shamanism is notoriously difﬁcult to
deﬁne with precision, but it involves the widespread tendency for specialised individuals to engage in what distinguished archaeologist Johan
Reinhard described as a ‘non-ordinary psychic state’.24
In animal evolution, the presence of a common phenotype or characteristic suggests either a common ancestor or convergent evolution.
Similarities between disconnected shamanic traditions may therefore
point to a common lineage or to convergent evolution due to common
biological factors. For example, accelerating drumming, reaching 4 Hz or
240 beats per minute, is prevalent in shamanistic tradition globally and
may have evolved due to interactions with natural theta frequencies of
brain response.25 Global similarities in shamanistic practice may be a
result of ancient origins as well as the convergence of cognitive technologies after generations of trial and error, reﬁnement and integration.
Apart from shamanism, pathways to altered states of consciousness are
found throughout cultures globally. Across a sample of 488 world societies,
over 90 per cent exhibited some form of institutionalised altered states of
consciousness.26 In Islamic Suﬁsm, for example, Whirling Dervishes
22

S. M. Shirokogoroff, Psychomental Complex of the Tungus (London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul, 1935).
23
M. Eliade, Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy (New York, NY: Pantheon
Books, 1964); D. Stern, ‘Masters of ecstasy’, National Geographic, 222(6) (2012),
110–131.
24
J. Reinhard, ‘Shamanism and spirit possession – the deﬁnition problem’. In J. T.
Hitchcock and R. L. Jones (eds.), Spirit Possession in the Nepal Himalayas
(Warminster: Aris and Phillips, 1976), pp. 12–20; M. Singh, ‘The cultural evolution of shamanism’, Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 41 (2018), 1–83.
25
M. J. Hove, J. Stelzer, T. Nierhaus, S. D. Thiel, C. Gundlach et al., ‘Brain network
reconﬁguration and perceptual decoupling during an absorptive state of consciousness’, Cerebral Cortex, 26(7) (2016), 3116–3124.
26
E. Bourguignon, ‘World distribution and patterns of possession states’, in R.
Prince (ed.), Trance and Possession States (Montreal: R. M. Bucke Memorial
Society, 1968), pp. 3–34.

191

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:16 Page Number: 192

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

attempt to dissolve one’s ego by entering a trance state via the ritual of
spinning continuously amidst chants and song. Hindu Sadhus devote
themselves to meditation, a life of ritual and a renunciation of worldly
things to achieve a certain state of mental experience. Gospel choirs
entrance churchgoers to prepare them for prayer, preaching, and liturgy.
Cultures have developed many techniques for inducing trance-like
altered states, including drumming, chanting, dancing, meditation, sexual
practices, sacred objects, architecture, immersion in nature, pain, fasting,
music, extreme sports, sleep deprivation, and the use of psychoactive
substances, to name but a few. Yet, with the exception of sexual trance
(which is rarely institutionalised),27 few of these methods seem to offer
much evolutionary beneﬁt to the individual participants. The pursuit of
altered states might even seem maladaptive, particularly for Neolithic
peoples living in a dangerous environment. Yet, the tendency exists
nearly universally across cultures. What beneﬁts do altered states bring
to people, now or deep in the past?
In an fMRI study, researchers observed that shamanic trance states
were associated with a suppression of perceptual stimuli. The authors
propose that shamanic trance enables a decoupling of cognition from the
constraints of the external world. Through dissociation, fundamental
aspects of reality might be grasped in different ways. This decoupling
may be important for exploring the diverse and ineffable experiences deep
in one’s own imagination. Visionary shamanic techniques may have
offered the beneﬁt of enabling practitioners to see new realities in their
imagination that others could not.28
Altered States as a Source of Variation in the Mind
For natural selection to operate in the realm of the mind, it needs a source
of variation. Variation in conscious experience can be produced in many
ways, including creative play and dreams. We propose that some altered
states of consciousness are a culturally important mechanism for
27
28

A. Safron, ‘What is orgasm? A model of sexual trance and climax via rhythmic
entrainment’, Socioaffective Neuroscience & Psychology, 6(1) (2016), 1–17.
R. Noll, ‘Mental imagery cultivation as a cultural phenomenon: The role of visions
in shamanism’, Current Anthropology, 26(4) (1985), 443–461.

192

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:16 Page Number: 193

The Enigma of Mind

promoting the generation of diversity and variation in mental experiences. For evidence, we look to the clinical research and neuroimaging
emerging from the current renaissance in psychedelic research in medicine. In laboratory studies, psychedelics have been shown to promote
divergent thinking29 and associative processing30 – and the vividness and
richness of the imagination is a key self-reported characteristic of psychedelic experiences. Researchers describe the subjective effects of psilocybin or magic mushrooms as ‘broadly unconstrained perception and
cognition, hyper-associative cognition and, at higher doses, a breakdown
in the perception of time, space and selfhood’.31
Heavy drumbeats, ritual, or psychotropic experiences can disrupt the
‘default mode’ of our logical and verbal mind.32 Once a person’s dominant
brain narrative releases control, there emerges an opportunity for
bottom-up elements to constitute a more diverse range of thinking.
This is the realm of intuition and free play in the imagination.
Disrupting inhibitory control can create an experience that more broadly
explores the space of cognitive combinations, leading to the discovery of
new ways of seeing the world.
This appears to be reﬂected on a neurological level. A recent placebocontrolled fMRI study showed the signiﬁcant causal impact of psilocybin
on connections between previously unconnected regions of the brain
(Figure 8.3).33 The authors note ‘the emergence of strong, topologically
long-range functional connections that are not present in a normal state’.
They conclude that the brain imaging shows ‘a less constrained and more

N. L. Mason, E. Mischler, M. V. Uthaug, and K. P. C. Kuypers, ‘Sub-acute effects
of psilocybin on empathy, creative thinking, and subjective well-being’, Journal of
Psychoactive Drugs, 51(2) (2019), 123–134.
30
M. Spitzer, M. Thimm, L. Hermle, P. Holzmann et al., ‘Increased activation of
indirect semantic associations under psilocybin’, Biological Psychiatry, 39(12)
(1996), 1055–1057.
31
L.-D. Lord, P. Expert, S. Atasoy, L. Roseman, K. Rapuano et al., ‘Dynamical
exploration of the repertoire of brain networks at rest is modulated by psilocybin’,
Neuroimage, 199 (2019), 127–142.
32
I. McGilchrist, The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the
Western World (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2019).
33
G. Petri, P. Expert, F. Turkheimer, R. Carhart-Harris, D. Nutt et al., ‘Homological
scaffolds of brain functional networks’, Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 11(101)
(2014): article 20140873.
29

193

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:16 Page Number: 194

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

F I G U R E 8 . 3 Simpliﬁed visualization of homological scaffolds representing
a comparison of communication between brain networks in people given a nonpsychedelic placebo compound (a) or psilocybin (b). Source: G. Petri et al., ‘Homological
scaffolds of brain functional networks’, Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 11 (2014):
20140873, Fig. 6, doi:10.1098/rsif.2014.0873. Licence: CC-BY.

intercommunicative mode of brain function, which is consistent with
descriptions of the nature of consciousness in the psychedelic state’.
One recent theory regarding psychedelic action in the brain focuses on
the relaxation of existing belief structures. A remarkable fMRI study by
Carhart-Harris et al. showed a deactivation of what is referred to as the
‘default mode network’ (DMN) – a group of brain regions associated with
introspection and self-referencing – during the hallucinogenic state produced by psilocybin.34 The DMN is a normal daily part of brain activity;
as we mature with experience, the pathways of information exchange in
the brain become more rigid or constrained in their patterns. These
patterns in the DMN shape the way in which we perceive the world,
quite literally forming the default mode of our self-narrative, or ‘ego’. The
authors suggest ‘the subjective effects of psychedelic drugs are caused by

34

R. L. Carhart-Harris, D. Erritzoe, T. Williams, J. M. Stone, L. J. Reed et al.,
‘Neural correlates of the psychedelic state as determined by fMRI studies with
psilocybin’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(6) (2012),
2138–2143.

194

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:17 Page Number: 195

The Enigma of Mind

decreased activity and connectivity in the brain’s key connector hubs,
enabling a state of unconstrained cognition’.
In part by reducing inhibitory frontal control, deactivating the DMN,
and momentarily turning off our ‘ego’, a psychedelic experience can allow
the imagination to operate more loosely, taking into account a broader
variety of bottom-up information streams and producing a greater diversity
of mental variation. To describe this effect, Robin Carhart-Harris and Karl
Friston35 introduced the REBUS model, which claims that psychedelics
cause an increase in bottom-up information ﬂow and an increase in overall
brain signal diversity.36 The result is that the brain’s ‘free energy landscape’
is made more accessible. Psychedelics are compared to annealing in metallurgy, where heating a system allows it to ‘attain a state of heightened
plasticity, in which the discovery of new energy minima . . . is accelerated’.
The authors further suggest that increased plasticity during psychedelic
states enables the emergence of new belief structures that ‘resonate more
harmoniously with previously hidden or silenced information’.

Ethnobotany and the Geography of Imagination
This next section considers the following question: how might the
availability of psychedelic plants and fungi have affected early societies
and cultural evolution?
One source of human cultural diversity is geographical diversity. For
instance, the local temperature of the environment can inﬂuence clothing,
shelters, and food. Geographical variations also seem to create an imprint
in the imagination: people tend to experience different things in a lush
rainforest, in a sparse highland steppe, or in a windswept fjord. Another
way in which geography may affect the imagination is through
variation in the availability of psychoactive plants. Harvard ethnobotanist
35

Friston is famous for devising a now dominant model of predictive coding in the
brain known as ‘free energy minimisation’ which is mathematically equivalent to
Smolensky’s ‘harmony maximisation’ function in artiﬁcial neural networks. See K.
J. Friston and K. E. Stephan, ‘Free-energy and the brain’, Synthese, 159(3) (2007),
417–458.
36
R. L. Carhart-Harris and K. J. Friston, ‘REBUS and the anarchic brain: Toward a
uniﬁed model of the brain action of psychedelics’, Pharmacological Reviews, 71(3)
(2019), 316–344.

195

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:17 Page Number: 196

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

Dr Richard Schultes (‘father of ethnobotany’) and Dr Albert Hofmann (the
ﬁrst to synthesise LSD and psilocybin) paint a clear picture of the incredibly broad cultural use of these plants throughout the ages:
The use of hallucinogenic or consciousness-expanding plants has been a
part of human experience for many millennia,37 yet modern Western
societies have only recently become aware of the signiﬁcance that these
plants have had in shaping the history of primitive and even of advanced
cultures.38

The deliberate use of mind-altering plants can be found across the animal
kingdom.39 The cultural use of ‘psychoplastogens’ probably antedates the
emergence of Homo sapiens (and may have catalysed it, as has been
suggested in the ‘Stoned Ape’ theory of human evolution).40 However,
ready access to psychoactive plants is highly dependent on ecological
conditions. Mind-altering plants such as peyote, San Pedro cactus,
ayahuasca, or anadenanthera,41 for instance, could only have been found
in the Americas. By some ﬂuke, the Americas are home to over 200 species
of hallucinogenic plants; there are just one-tenth as many psychoactive
species across all of Eurasia and Africa. The reason for this imbalance of
botanical diversity is an outstanding scientiﬁc enigma.42
How might the accessibility of psychoactive plants have affected the
evolution of the various cultures? The different chemicals found in different plants produce signiﬁcantly different experiences. Psilocybin mushrooms, Amanita muscaria, San Pedro cacti, ayahuasca, datura, kava, or
cannabis – they all produce a very different set of mental effects. What
37

Alternatively, this timeline may extend back millions of years, applying the notion
that human ancestors may have regularly eaten dung-loving (coprophilic) mushrooms while following the tracks of megafauna, as proposed in T. McKenna, Food
of the Gods: The Search for the Original Tree of Knowledge: A Radical History of Plants,
Drugs and Human Evolution (London: Random House, 1999).
38
R. E. Schultes, A. Hoffman, and C. Ratsch, Plants of the Gods: Their Sacred, Healing
and Hallucinogenic Powers (Rochester, VT: Healing Arts Press, 2012).
39
G. Samorini, Animals and Psychedelics: The Natural World and the Instinct to Alter
Consciousness (New York, NY: Simon & Schuster, 2002).
40
McKenna, Food of the Gods.
41
C. M. Torres, ‘Archaeological evidence for the antiquity of psychoactive plant use
in the Central Andes’, Annali dei Musei Civici Rovereto, 11 (1995), 291–326.
42
W. La Barre, ‘Old and new world narcotics: A statistical question and an ethnological reply’, Economic Botany, 24(1) (1970), 73–80.

196

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:17 Page Number: 197

The Enigma of Mind

might this mean for cultural evolution? If the collective imagination of a
population is inﬂuenced by the types of altered states they can access,
then perhaps the local accessibility of certain plants may help explain
certain patterns of cultural evolution. For instance, various rock art
motifs may have included representations of ‘entoptic visuals’ – that is,
visual patterns from certain altered states may have been carved directly
onto the rock.43 David Lewis-Williams and Thomas Dowson illustrate a
comparison between Neolithic art patterns and the neurophysiological
visual phenomena sometimes called ‘form constants’ or ‘phosphenes’
described by volunteers in a laboratory setting (Figure 8.4). Rock art
represents a material record of early human imagination; it is provocative
to consider that the history of altered states of mind is reﬂected in that
record (Figure 8.5).44
The mere geographical availability of entheogens (a preferred ethnobotanical term for a psychoactive substance used to induce spiritual
experiences) is not sufﬁcient for cultural adoption. While psychoactive
mushrooms were available to Europeans for thousands of years, there is
minimal evidence for their use. Scholars agree that there is a complete lack
of textual evidence for psilocybin mushroom use in Europe prior to the
modern era, despite the fact that several different species of psilocybin
mushrooms were native to Europe and the British Isles.45 Either 50,000
years of human exploration did not uncover these psychedelic mushrooms, or psychedelic experiences were unappealing to ancient man, or

J. D. Lewis-Williams and T. A. Dowson, ‘On vision and power in the Neolithic:
Evidence from the decorated monuments’, Cultural Anthropology, 34(1) (1993),
55–65.
44
Alta, Norway, has been designated a UNESCO World Heritage site for its
‘compelling portrayals of prehistoric social life, dancing, processions, and rituals’.
While many of the (over 6,000) etchings at the site depict human or animal ﬁgures,
there is also a selection of unexplainable forms, providing support to the theory
that some of the art reﬂects mental or ‘entopic’ visualisations.
45
G. Guzmán, J. W. Allen, and J. Gartz, ‘A worldwide geographical distribution of
the neurotropic fungi, an analysis and discussion’, Annali dei Musei Civici Rovereto,
14 (1998), 189–280; C. Ruck, ‘The mushroom stones: Dionysus, Orpheus and the
wolves of war’, in D. Spasova (ed.), Megalithic Culture in Ancient Thrace
(Blagoevgrad: Rilski University Press, 2015), pp. 1–7; G. Samorini, ‘Mushroom
efﬁgies in world archaeology: From rock art to mushroom-stones’, in D. Spasova
(ed.), Proceedings of the Conference ‘The Stone Mushrooms of Thrace’ (Alexandroupoli:
Greek Open University, 2012), pp. 16–42.
43

197

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:17 Page Number: 198

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

F I G U R E 8 . 4 Model illustrating suggested parallels between neurophysiological
visual ‘form constants’ and Neolithic rock art motifs. Source: J. D. Lewis-Williams and T. A.
Dowson, ‘On vision and power in the Neolithic: Evidence from the decorated monuments’,
Cultural Anthropology, 34(1) (1993), 55–65 (at 56, Fig. 1).

198

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:18 Page Number: 199

The Enigma of Mind

F I G U R E 8 . 5 Rock art from roughly 4000 BC observed at Alta, Norway.

Photo: Albert Lin.

these psychoactive mushrooms had been culturally adopted long ago, but
then, for various reasons, culturally rejected.
In our investigation of ancient representations of psychoactive mushroom use, we learned that there are over 100 mushroom-shaped prehistoric carvings on Stonehenge (Figure 8.6).46 Since their discovery in 1953,
these carvings have been interpreted as upwards-facing unhalfted bronze
axeheads. Yet, the carvings exhibit a far greater diversity in form than is
typical of the slowly evolving bronze axe. And why carve a weapon of war
or labour on a spiritual site? We suggest that it is highly plausible that the
Stonehenge carvings are evidence for the prehistoric use of entheogenic
mushrooms. While further study is needed, it is clear that the modern

46

Laser scanning techniques have revealed hundreds of mushroom-shaped carvings
on Stonehenge. See M. Abbott and H. Anderson-Whymark, Stonehenge Laser Scan:
Archaeological Analysis Report (Portsmouth: English Heritage, 2012). Although
described as ‘axeheads’, the carvings are far more diverse in form than the
comparatively conservative shapes of bronze age axeheads from southern
Britain. See S. Needham, The Classiﬁcation of Chalcolithic and Early Bronze Age
Copper and Bronze Axe-Heads from Southern Britain (Oxford: Archaeopress, 2018).
Is it plausible that the mushroom-shaped carvings on Stonehenge are, in fact,
mushrooms?

199

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:19 Page Number: 200

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

F I G U R E 8 . 6 Mushroom-shaped prehistoric carvings on Stonehenge
(exterior E face of Stone 4). Source: M. Abbott and H. Anderson-Whymark, Stonehenge Laser
Scan: Archaeological Analysis Report (Portsmouth: English Heritage, 2012), 29, Fig. 12.

‘discovery’ of magic mushrooms in 1957 catalysed a dramatic transformation of human culture.47 Perhaps it wasn’t the ﬁrst time.
Why might psychoactive substances have been used in the distant past
and then lost again? Consider Cannabis sativa, which is the most commonly used entheogen. Cannabis has a well-documented history in ritual
experience, beginning with a rich textual description of Scythian ceremonial cannabis smoke-tents in 430 BC.48 In 2019, archaeologists found
hard evidence for the smoking of cannabis in the mountains of eastern
China, dating to 500 BC. There, researchers found braziers with high
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) cannabis in tombs that showed evidence
of ‘funerary rites that included ﬂames, rhythmic music, and hallucinogen
47
48

R. G. Wasson, ‘Seeking the magic mushroom’, Life Magazine, 42(19) (1957),
100–120.
J. M. McPartland and W. Hegman, ‘Cannabis utilization and diffusion patterns in
prehistoric Europe: A critical analysis of archaeological evidence’, Vegetation
History and Archaeobotany, 27(4) (2018), 627–634.

200

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:19 Page Number: 201

The Enigma of Mind

smoke, all intended to guide people into an altered state of mind’.49
Nevertheless, there are large gaps in the history of cannabis. Despite
its having reached Europe by 6000 BC,50 the psychoactive effects of
cannabis seem to have been ignored by the civilisations of Egypt,
Greece, Rome, and, of course, later Christian cultures in Europe.
A recent ﬁnd indicates that the spiritual use of cannabis was known by
some. In 2020, a team of archaeologists found direct evidence for the
spiritual use of cannabis in the ancient Judahite religion. These researchers discovered the psychoactive chemical (THC), found only in cannabis,
within burned residues on a temple altar in the ancient kingdom of Judah,
dating to c. 700 BC.51 For context, the ﬁrst Jewish temple in Jerusalem
was built approximately 950 BC, but it was not until after 650 BC that
the Jerusalem temple was made the exclusive temple.
This is not the only evidence for cannabis use in ancient Mosaic religious
practices. A passage in Exodus indicates the use of ‫( קנה בשם‬qaneh bosem) in
the formula for the production of the sacred anointing oil for priests.52 For
thousands of years, qaneh bosem has been translated as ‘sweet cane’ (or
calamus), yet it is just as likely to be a Hebrew transliteration of a foreign
word just like another ingredient in the holy oil, ‫ קנמון‬qinamon, or
cinnamon.53 Just as the Hebrew qinamon can be linked to the Greek
kinnamonon, it seems the Hebrew qaneh bosem can be linked to the Greek
kánnabis. This idea was originally proposed by Polish anthropologist Sara
Benetowa in 1936, yet it fell into obscurity. One obvious reason for this
M. Ren, Z. Tang, X. Wu, R. Spengler, H. Jiang et al., ‘The origins of cannabis
smoking: Chemical residue evidence from the ﬁrst millennium BCE in the Pamirs’,
Science Advances, 5(6) (2019), article eaaw1391.
50
The Yamnaya Culture, a proto-Indoeuropean culture, may have introduced the
practice of smoking cannabis by 3500 BC. See T. Long, M. Wagner, D. Demske,
C. Leipe, and P. E. Tarasov, ‘Cannabis in Eurasia: Origin of human use and Bronze
Age trans-continental connections’, Vegetation History and Archaeobotany, 26(2)
(2017), 245–258.
51
E. Arie, B. Rosen, and D. Namdar, ‘Cannabis and frankincense at the Judahite
Shrine of Arad’, Tel Aviv, 47(1) (2020), 5–28.
52
‘Take the following ﬁne spices: 500 shekels of liquid myrrh, half as much (that is,
250 shekels) of fragrant cinnamon, 250 shekels of fragrant calamus [‫ קנה בשם‬qaneh
bosem], 500 shekels of cassia – all according to the sanctuary shekel – and a hin of
olive oil. Make these into a sacred anointing oil, a fragrant blend, the work of a
perfumer. It will be the sacred anointing oil.’ NIV, Exodus 30:23–25.
53
J. Benner, ‘The facts about kaneh bosem’ (Ancient Hebrew Research Center, 2020),
www.ancient-hebrew.org/studies-words/facts-about-kaneh-bosem.htm.
49

201

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:19 Page Number: 202

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

obscurity is the intense cultural taboo around cannabis: 1936 was the same
year as the release of the anti-cannabis propaganda ﬁlm Reefer Madness.54
There can be little doubt that, in the modern era, cultural taboos have
actively suppressed knowledge regarding entheogens. This suppression
also seems to have occurred in the ancient past, as well. An example of such
a taboo can even be seen in Exodus, which demands a punishment of exile
to any common person making use of a similar formula:
Say to the Israelites, ‘This is to be my sacred anointing oil for the
generations to come. Do not pour it on anyone else’s body and do not
make any other oil using the same formula. It is sacred, and you are to
consider it sacred. Whoever makes perfume like it and puts it on anyone
other than a priest must be cut off from their people.’55

Why is it so common for cultures to institute taboos on the use of
entheogenic plants and mushrooms? On the one hand, it may be that
psychoactive plants and fungi are dangerous – cultures that suppress
them may be healthier. Yet, ancient Greece and Roman sources regularly
discussed more toxic psychoactive plants, like henbane or datura.56 So,
alternatively, the taboos might be motivated by the transformative
nature of entheogenic experiences, insofar as they pose a disruptive threat
to dominant cultural power structures. Power structures, particularly
those dealing with magic and spirituality, may have been more likely to
sustain their power if they forbade the common use of entheogenic plants.
That is, if only the high priests could access entheogenic experiences,
lesser priests and common people were less likely to be having different
ideas. Yet, it is still a mystery why entheogens were virtually unknown
during most of European history and so virulently opposed during the
‘Drug War’ of the last 50 years. Now that the taboos are lifting on
entheogen use,57 it is possible to scientiﬁcally study the effects of these
54

M. Booth, Cannabis: A History (London: Macmillan, 2015).
NIV, Exodus 30:31–33.
K. Fatur, ‘“Hexing herbs” in ethnobotanical perspective: A historical review of the
uses of anticholinergic Solanaceae plants in Europe’, Economic Botany, 74(2) (2020),
140–158.
57
For one of many examples, the Entheogenic Plant and Fungus Policy Act of
2020 has decriminalised natural psychedelics including magic mushrooms, ayahuasca, and mescaline in the jurisdiction of Washington, DC.
55
56

202

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:19 Page Number: 203

The Enigma of Mind

powerful sources of neuroplasticity and variation in the imagination and
ask the following question: how will they affect the future of evolution of
the conscious mind?
Sympathy and the Replication of Conscious Experience
Now we turn to the second evolutionary mechanism in conscious experience: sympathy. Variations in experience, like variations in the genetic
code, are a crucial driver of evolution. But how can these variations in
conscious experience be reproduced between people?58 A great deal of
thinking has considered the outsize role of language and imitation in
replicating experiences and human culture. We propose that sympathy is
an even more primitive mechanism for spreading experiences between
people. Sympathy, or fellow feeling, seemingly facilitates the reproduction of conscious feelings and affective states of mind. Sympathetic
resonance between people allows the mental experiences of one person
to be shared with another.
In 1976, Richard Dawkins introduced ‘memes’ – as the counterpart to
genes – as the ‘units of imitation’ that might explain cultural evolution.59
Darwin himself had originally proposed that imitation played a major
role in man’s rapid cultural evolution:
If some one man in a tribe, more sagacious than the others, invented a new
snare or weapon, or other means of attack or defence, the plainest selfinterest, without the assistance of much reasoning power, would prompt
the other members to imitate him; and all would thus proﬁt.60

While imitation is valuable for accumulating and spreading cultural
knowledge, it is a cognitive capacity that is largely unique to humans.
Some groups of chimpanzees can transmit simple skills from parent to
child – for instance, cracking nuts with a stone and anvil – but their
58

Individual memory is too vast a subject to discuss here. Yet, in Donald Hebb’s The
Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory (New York, NY: Wiley, 1947)
the ‘mnemonic trace’ is described as ‘a lasting pattern of reverberatory activity’.
59
R. Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene, 40th anniversary edn (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2016).
60
C. Darwin, The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex, 2 vols. (New York,
NY: Appleton, 1871).

203

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:19 Page Number: 204

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

process of social imitation is extremely slow. Scientists have found that it
takes multiple years for young chimpanzees to learn nut cracking skills.61
If imitation is largely unique to humans, what came before? Darwin
suspected that a social nature needed to evolve before imitation. In
another sweet concordance with Wallace,62 Darwin claimed (in The
Descent of Man) that a key factor of sociality was sympathy:
In order that . . . the apelike progenitors of man should become social,
they must have acquired the same instinctive feelings . . . they would have
felt uneasy when separated from their comrades, for whom they would
have felt some degree of love . . . all this implies some degree of sympathy.

Both Darwin and Wallace viewed sympathy as a primitive and essential
factor in human social evolution. Thus, we claim that, even before the
development of language or imitation (imitation is speciﬁcally necessary
for ‘memetic’ cultural evolution),63 sympathy provided a mechanism for
reproducing conscious feelings. To understand how, the term sympathy
needs some historical framing – especially since its modern meaning has
shifted to mean something more like ‘pity’.
Darwin was familiar with the Scottish economist Adam Smith, who, in his
ﬁrst book, investigated the role of sympathy in human society.64 Smith
explains how sympathy causes the automatic exchange of feelings, such that
people feel good when other people feel good and feel bad when other people
feel bad. Smith claimed that this sympathetic capacity gives people a natural
incentive for moral action: that is, it feels good to make others feel good.
Further, recent work disputes that social ‘copying’ is, in fact, the mechanism for
the transmission. See E. Bandini, J. Grossmann, M. Funk, A. Albiach-Serrano, and
C. Tennie, ‘Naïve orangutans (Pongo abelii and Pongo pygmaeus) individually
acquire nut-cracking using hammer tools’, American Journal of Primatology, 83(9)
(2021), article e23304.
62
‘When the social and sympathetic feelings came into active operation, and the
intellectual and moral faculties became fairly developed, man would cease to be
inﬂuenced by “natural selection” in his physical form . . . [but] his mind would
become subject to those very inﬂuences from which his body had escaped’, A. R.
Wallace, ‘The origin of human races and the antiquity of man deduced from the
theory of “natural selection”’, Journal of the Anthropological Society of London, 2
(1864), clviii–clxxxvii.
63
S. Blackmore, ‘Imitation and the deﬁnition of a meme’, Journal of Memetics –
Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission, 2(11) (1998), 159–170.
64
A. Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments (London: Printed for A. Miller and
A. Kincaid and J. Bell in Edinburgh, 1759).
61

204

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:20 Page Number: 205

The Enigma of Mind

Today, the sympathy of Darwin or Wallace might be described with
the term ‘empathy’. Yet, empathy is a rather new word, introduced in
1909 as a translation of the German Einfühlung – a term used by Theodor
Lipps and other psychologists to describe the psychische Resonanz that
occurred during aesthetic experiences.65 In a modern context, empathy is
sometimes described as ‘an effortful process by which we try to comprehend another’s experience’ whereas sympathy is ‘a direct perceptual
awareness of another person’s experience akin to the phenomenon of
sympathetic resonance’.66 Thus, we aim to understand human sympathy
through the physical concept of sympathetic resonance.

Resonance, Mirror Neurons, and Rhythmic Entrainment
The idea of sympathetic resonance is one of the most powerful and generalisable ideas in the physical sciences. It occurs when ‘a system – a physical
oscillator – is subjected to a periodic driving force by an external agency’.67
Even in ancient times, people may have noticed how beating a drum can make
another drum rattle or hum, even at a distance. The Greek Stoic philosophers
taught that the universe was in sympathetic resonance with itself.68 Today,
modern cosmological models use sympathetic resonance to explain the
origin of the universe during the inﬂationary stage of the ‘Big Bang’.69
S. Lanzoni, ‘Sympathy in mind (1876–1900)’, Journal of the History of Ideas, 70(2)
(2009), 265–287.
J. Decety and T. Chaminade, ‘Neural correlates of feeling sympathy’,
Neuropsychologia, 41(2) (2003), 127–138.
67
A. P. French, Vibrations and Waves (New York, NY: MIT Press, 1966).
68
‘[Chrysippus] ﬁrst holds that the whole is uniﬁed by pneuma, which pervades it
completely, and by which the universe is held together and stabilised and is
sympathetic with itself’, Alexander of Aphrodisias, On Mixture, 216.14–16;
‘Meditate often on the interconnectedness and mutual interdependence of all
things in the universe. For in a sense, all things are mutually woven together
and therefore have an afﬁnity for each other – for one thing follows after another
according to their tension of movement, their sympathetic stirrings, and the unity
of all substance’, Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, 6.38.
69
The winners of the 2002 Dirac Prize for physics claim that, during cosmic
inﬂation, an oscillating ‘inﬂaton’ ﬁeld resonated with all the other ﬁelds in the
standard model, producing particles. The Big Bang, in effect, created everything in
the universe through this resonance. See L. Kofman, A. Linde, and A. A.
Starobinsky, ‘Towards the theory of reheating after inﬂation’, Physical Review D,
56(6) (1997), article 3258. Special thanks to Patrick Cooper for drawing this to my
attention.
65
66

205

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:20 Page Number: 206

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

While sympathetic resonance is a ﬁrmly scientiﬁc concept, it also
played a central role in the history of magic.70 And, perhaps because
resonance seemed so magical, it took hundreds of years for scientists to
accept the concept of resonance as more than a metaphor, namely as a
common principle operating across all physical media, in acoustic
systems, electromagnetic systems, gravitational systems, etc.71 It is also
common, however, to invoke the concept of ‘resonance’ to explain properties and values within human social systems, e.g., describing an artwork that ‘resonates’ with a viewer or a politician that ‘resonates’ with his
or her followers.72 Popular business books even provide guidance on how
to give speeches or presentations to resonate with an audience.73 Is this
sort of human resonance a metaphor, or is it a mechanism? Consider the
view of neurologist Oliver Sacks:
People sing together and dance together in every culture, and one can
imagine them having done so around the ﬁrst ﬁres, a hundred thousand
years ago . . . In such a situation, there seems to be an actual binding of
nervous systems accomplished by rhythm.74

Some human resonances surely occur in the brain due to the oscillatory
nature of neurons and neural circuitry. The brain contains vast hierarchies of rhythmic, reverberatory electrical oscillations; with all these oscillators, the brain inevitably resonates with itself and with stimuli in the
environment. One simple and strong resonance effect, measurable via
EEG, occurs when perceiving rhythmic pulses of light.75 Oddly, some
of the most powerful neural resonances are correlated with the induction

‘How do magic spells work? By sympathy, and by the natural concord of things
that are alike and opposition of things that are different’, Plotinus (b. 204 AD), The
Enneads, IV. 4. 40.
71
M. Buchanan, ‘Going into resonance’, Nature Physics, 15 (2019), article 203.
72
H. Rosa, Resonance: A Sociology of Our Relationship to the World (Cambridge, MA:
Polity Press, 2019).
73
N. Duarte, Resonate: Present Visual Stories That Transform Audiences (Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley, 2013).
74
O. Sacks, Musicophilia: Tales of Music and the Brain (New York, NY: Knopf, 2007).
75
C. S. Herrmann, ‘Human EEG responses to 1–100 Hz ﬂicker: Resonance phenomena in visual cortex and their potential correlation to cognitive phenomena’,
Experimental Brain Research, 137(3–4) (2001), 346–353.
70

206

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:20 Page Number: 207

The Enigma of Mind

of hallucinations with geometrical patterns similar to those seen during
psychedelic altered states.76
A more complex form of human resonance is known as ‘motor resonance’. This phenomenon describes resonances between individuals, and it
occurs when observations of human actions produce matching activity in
the observer’s brain and behaviour. For instance, an observer who
watches someone pick up an egg will have, in their brain, a similar set
of neural ﬁring patterns as when they pick up an egg themselves.
Observation of another person’s actions triggers associated intentions,
goals, or affective states; these resonant associations allow individuals to
gain inference on the person they are observing. Astonishingly, scientists
have measured this motor resonance – it occurs not just when observing
actions directly but also when simply listening to stories describing
actions or when reading stories about actions.77
We propose that the mechanism of sympathetic resonance enables the
sharing of feelings (or at least some approximation of the feelings)
between people during interpersonal interactions or through their interactions with artefacts. The proposed neural-cognitive basis for this sympathetic resonance is the so-called ‘mirror neuron system’.78 In a now
famous essay, Ramachandran claimed that advances in the mirror neuron
system seemed to be the key mechanism underpinning humanity’s ‘great
leap forward’ in evolutionary success:
Anytime you watch someone else doing something (or even starting to do
something), the corresponding mirror neuron might ﬁre in your brain,
thereby allowing you to ‘read’ and understand another’s intentions, and
thus to develop a sophisticated ‘theory of other minds’.79

B. C. Ter Meulen, D. Tavy, and B. C. Jacobs, ‘From stroboscope to dream machine:
A history of ﬂicker-induced hallucinations’, European Neurology, 62(5) (2009),
316–320; T. P. Cowan, ‘Devils in the ink: William Burroughs, Brion Gysin, and
geometry as a method for accessing intermediary beings’, Aries, 19(2) (2019),
167–211.
77
R. A. Zwaan, L. J. Taylor, and M. De Boer, ‘Motor resonance as a function of
narrative time: Further tests of the linguistic focus hypothesis’, Brain and
Language, 112(3) (2010), 143–149.
78
G. Rizzolatti, L. Fadiga, L. Fogassi, and V. Gallese, ‘Resonance behaviors and
mirror neurons’, Archives italiennes de biologie, 137(2) (1999), 85–100.
79
V. S. Ramachandran, ‘Mirror neurons and imitation learning as the driving force
behind “the great leap forward” in human evolution’, Edge.Org (2000), 1–7.
76

207

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:20 Page Number: 208

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

Long before language permitted the exchange of complex ideas,
human sympathetic resonance seems to have enabled the exchange of
conscious mental states. These experiences weren’t shared with complete ﬁdelity, of course, but the phenomenon might be comparable to
how music provides a meaningfully similar reproduction of rich affective
experiences between people. The ability to feel the music or to feel what
another person is feeling is, of course, highly dependent on prior
cultural experience. But, subject to cultural attunement, the rhythms
of music do seem to ‘induce affective states’ through resonances with the
naturally oscillatory brain:80
The brain does not . . . ‘compute’ keys of melodic sequences, and it does not
‘infer’ meters of rhythmic input. Rather, it resonates to music [due to]
oscillation of neural populations, rhythmic bursting, and neural synchrony.81

In a group of people, the sympathetic exchange of intersubjective
emotional states is sometimes referred to as ‘the vibe’. Because people
have the ability to feel what other people in a group are feeling, the direct
exchange of experience can lead to the emergence of prototypical group
entrainment states that may evolve depending on their contribution to
important cultural activities. For instance, certain group states could
support vigour and enthusiasm during war or support calm focus for
cognitive activities like complex tool manufacturing. This sympathetic
resonance can also help explain what Émile Durkheim called ‘collective
consciousness’ or ‘collective effervescence’ during tribal ceremonies:
Once the individuals are gathered together, a sort of electricity is
generated from their closeness and quickly launches them to an
extraordinary height of exaltation . . . Thus the men of the clan and the
things which are classiﬁed in it form by their union a solid system, all of
whose parts are united and vibrate sympathetically.82

W. J. Trost, C. Labbé, and D. Grandjean, ‘Rhythmic entrainment as a musical
affect induction mechanism’, Neuropsychologia, 96 (2017), 96–110.
81
E. W. Large, ‘Neurodynamics of music’, in M. R. Jones, R. R. Fay, and A. N.
Popper (eds.), Music Perception (New York, NY: Springer, 2010), pp. 201–231.
82
É. Durkheim, The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life, trans. J. Swain (London:
George Allen & Unwin, 1912).
80

208

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:20 Page Number: 209

The Enigma of Mind

Rhythmic entrainment is a form of resonance activity that describes
the spontaneous synchrony that occurs when two or more closely
tuned oscillators interact with each other. Entrainment was discovered
by the Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens in 1665, after observing the
emergent synchrony of the pendula of two clocks placed on a common
beam. The capacity for rhythmic entrainment in music, dance, and
other rituals may have played a signiﬁcant role in human cultural
evolution. In modern studies, entrainment has been found to improve
cooperation in teams,83 enhance social bonding, and increase prosocial
behaviour.84
Although rhythmic entrainment naturally emerges in oscillatory
systems throughout nature, ‘holding a musical beat’ is a uniquely human
characteristic.85 Although there are isolated instances in animals (like
the YouTube star Snowball, a dancing parakeet),86 these exceptions
prove the rule.87 Non-human animals are, for some reason, deeply
resistant to the natural phenomena of sympathetic resonance or
rhythmic entrainment.
Yet, animals should have the capacity for rhythmic entrainment –
simply because much of everyday neural functioning relies upon entrainment. For instance, the rhythmic beating of the heart is driven by its
rhythmic entrainment to central pattern generators in the spinal cord.88
This example precisely shows why it can be dangerous for animals to
allow entrainment to external rhythms – it is one thing for the heart of an
animal to be entrained by the spinal cord, but it would be deadly if its
heart could be entrained by a clever predator. Did animals evolve defence
S. S. Wiltermuth and C. Heath, ‘Synchrony and cooperation’, Psychological Science,
20(1) (2009), 1–5.
84
T. C. Rabinowitch and A. N. Meltzoff, ‘Synchronized movement experience
enhances peer cooperation in preschool children’, Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 160 (2017), 21–32.
85
S. A. Kotz, A. Ravignani, and W. T. Fitch, ‘The evolution of rhythm processing’,
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 22 (2018), 896–910.
86
A. D. Patel, J. R. Iverson, M. R. Bregman, and I. Schulz, ‘Experimental evidence
for synchronization to a musical beat in a nonhuman animal’, Current Biology, 19
(10) (2009), 827–830.
87
A. D. Patel, ‘The evolutionary biology of musical rhythm: Was Darwin wrong?’,
PLoS Biology, 12(3) (2014), article e1001821.
88
R. L. Calabrese, F. Nadim, and Ø. H. Olsen, ‘Heartbeat control in the medicinal
leech: A model system for understanding the origin, coordination, and modulation
of rhythmic motor patterns’, Journal of Neurobiology, 27(3) (1995), 390–402.
83

209

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:20 Page Number: 210

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

mechanisms to protect against external entrainment?89 If so, perhaps
humans evolved biological or cultural capacities to ‘let down the guard’
and open up to certain kinds of rhythmic entrainment with other people.
Notably, some psychoactive plants and alcohol seem to enhance the
perception of music, dance, and interpersonal sympathy; in ages past,
perhaps they helped catalyse new depths of human resonance and rhythmic entrainment?
Our understanding of human resonance is rapidly advancing in
response to various advances in biosensing. Hyperscanning is a brain
imaging technique used to measure correlated brain activity between
multiple people as they interact.90 Scientists have found, for instance,
that there is greater neural synchrony between the brains of two conversing friends than between the brains of two conversing strangers.91
Neuroscientist Suzanne Dikker et al. discovered that brain synchrony is
associated with the performance of students in classrooms and collaborators on teams.92 Technologist Ramesh Rao applied hyperscanning to
the heart beats of multiple people performing the highly repetitive movements in Kundalini meditation; his ﬁndings showed a fascinating pattern
of emergent interpersonal coherence.93 In the ritual context of ﬁre
walking, researchers have found evidence for physiological resonance
(synchronisation in heart rate) between participants and related
observers.94 Thus, new scientiﬁc techniques are revealing how different
For instance, the cuttleﬁsh uses ﬂickering skin patterns to mesmerise prey. See M.
J. How, M. D. Norman, J. Finn, W.-S. Chung, and N. J. Marshall, ‘Dynamic skin
patterns in cephalopods’, Frontiers in Physiology, 8 (2017), article 393.
90
A. Czeszumski, S. Eustergerling, A. Lang, D. Menrath, M. Gerstenberger et al.,
‘Hyperscanning: A valid method to study neural inter-brain underpinnings of
social interaction’, Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 14 (2020), article 39.
91
S. Kinreich, A. Djalovski, L. Kraus, Y. Louzoun, and R. Feldman, ‘Brain-to-brain
synchrony during naturalistic social interactions’, Scientiﬁc Reports, 7(1) (2017),
1–12.
92
S. Dikker, L. Wan, I. Davidesco, L. Kaggen, M. Oostrik et al., ‘Brain-to-brain
synchrony tracks real-world dynamic group interactions in the classroom’, Current
Biology, 27(9) (2017), 1375–1380; D. A. Reinero, S. Dikker, and J. J. Van Bavel,
‘Inter-brain synchrony in teams predicts collective performance’, Social Cognitive
and Affective Neuroscience, 16(1–2) (2021), 43–57.
93
G. Quer, J. Daftari, and R. R. Rao, ‘Heart rate wavelet coherence analysis to
investigate group entrainment’, Pervasive Mobile Computing, 28 (2016), 21–34.
94
D. Xygalatas, ‘The biosocial basis of collective effervescence: An experimental
anthropological study of a ﬁre-walking ritual’, Fieldwork in Religion, 9(1) (2015),
53–67.
89

210

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:20 Page Number: 211

The Enigma of Mind

ritual practices can support synchrony, rhythmic entrainment, and
physiological resonance. Because the synchrony of neural ﬁring helps
create conscious experiences in individuals, biological synchrony between
people perhaps indicates the shared and extended nature of consciousness.95
Many rituals seem to enable humans to share a collective consciousness.
The evolution of rhythmic rituals may have had a profound effect on
social cohesion. War drums are used in many cultures to bind together
groups of warriors and give them a shared mental state. However, not all
rituals need to be rhythm-centred to induce the sympathetic replication of
mental states. For instance, the extensive archaeological record of Mayan
culture – and advances in epigraphy – have painted a picture of a cultural
fabric held together through a framework of spirituality accessed via
altered states of consciousness by all levels of society.96 As interpreted
by David Stuart, the acclaimed Mayanist credited with deciphering the
Maya Codex, altered states were accessed through exhaustive repetitive
dance, public incense burning, extreme fasting, entheogens, and, most
prominently, the auto-sacriﬁcial letting of blood by rulers (Figure 8.7).97
Bloodletting was resonant but it was not rhythmic. The high king was
believed to be the ‘vessel’ of ‘ku’h’ – a force understood as the divine
energy ﬂowing within all things. Standing atop pyramids in front of their
gathered subjects, kings spilled their blood in ritualised acts symbolising
the transferal of the ku’h within them to the people, thus establishing
their societal power. These were bloody ceremonies of pain, as the ruler
would pierce their own tongue or penis with a holy instrument, such as
an engraved stingray spine. Through the human capacity for sympathy,
ritual spectacles like this would have produced extremely powerful
shared experiences. Perhaps ritual experiences that resonate more will
replicate more.
A. L. Valencia and T. Froese, ‘What binds us? Inter-brain neural synchronization
and its implications for theories of human consciousness’, Neuroscience of
Consciousness, 2020(1) (2020), article niaa010.
96
D. Stuart, ‘Ideology and classic Maya kingship’, in V. L. Scarborough (ed.),
A Catalyst for Ideas: Anthropological Archaeology and the Legacy of Douglas Schwartz
(Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research Press, 2005), pp. 257–286; S.
Houston and D. Stuart, ‘Of gods, glyphs and kings: Divinity and rulership among
the classic Maya’, Antiquity, 70(268) (1996), 289–312.
97
S. Houston, ‘Into the minds of ancients: Advances in Maya glyph studies’, Journal
of World Prehistory, 14(2) (2000), 121–201.
95

211

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:20 Page Number: 212

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

F I G U R E 8 . 7 Mayan bloodletting ceremony, as depicted in Lintel 24 from
Structure 23 at Yaxchilan (Am1923, Maud.4, The Yaxchilan Lintels, The British
Museum). © The Trustees of the British Museum.

Resonance, in the context of this discussion, is a mechanism for experience transmission between people. In culture, as was exhibited by the
Maya, the role of resonant experiences between minds may be integral
to maintaining the coherence of societal structure. Yet it is challenging to
translate an internal experience into a transmittable external action, a
reality reﬂected in the Mayan glyph tzak meaning ‘conjure (in the context
of vision)’, which shows a ﬁsh held in a left hand.98 As Stuart points out, a
slippery ﬁsh in hand may be a metaphor for the illusive nature of our
98

Stuart, ‘Ideology and classic Maya kingship’.

212

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:21 Page Number: 213

The Enigma of Mind

liminal and ineffable dance with the divine. Yet, the attempt to face the
challenge of sharing internal experience is present in the rich variety of
public ceremonies found throughout human culture.

Harmony as a Selection Pressure in Human Evolution
In this chapter, we have proposed imagination as a mechanism of mental
variation and sympathy as a mechanism of mental reproduction. We now
consider the classical concept of harmony as a selection mechanism within
conscious experience. To begin, we address the following question: what
is conscious experience? The neuroscientist Stanislaw Deheane put forward one of the most popular theories of consciousness, known as the
‘Global Neuronal Workspace’.99 Given that a person can only have one
conscious experience at a time, Dehaene claims that consciousness consists of the mental elements that have temporarily won the ongoing
competition for access to this uniﬁed space (that is, the global neuronal
workspace). Thus, conscious experience is that which is integrated into
the global neural workspace – and this competition for dominance in
awareness serves as an evolutionary pressure.
Beyond the competition of individual mental elements, we suggest that
the mind harmonises competing mental impulses into a single conscious
experience. How might the classical concept of harmony help explain
complex selection pressures in the mind? We hypothesise that harmonisation drives mental selection forces because coherence or periodic synchrony
between mental elements is stabler and lower in free energy.100 In the
following section, we will show how harmonisation might be able to
explain how the mind can integrate the diverse experiences of an individual

99
100

S. Dehaene, H. Lau, and S. Kouider, ‘What is consciousness, and could machines
have it?’, Science, 358(6362) (2017), 486–492.
A similar discussion can be found in Safron’s consideration of self-organising
harmonic modes: A. Safron, ‘An Integrated World Modeling Theory (IWMT) of
consciousness: Combining integrated information and global neuronal workspace
theories with the free energy principle and active inference framework; towards
solving the Hard problem and characterizing agentic causation’, Frontiers in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 3 (2020), article 30.

213

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:22 Page Number: 214

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

or collective consciousness. The humanistic concept of harmony can be
found in both Eastern and Western classical philosophy, psychology,
neuroscience, and physics, but we will begin with evolutionary theory.
Wallace, the younger co-discoverer of Darwinian evolution, presented
‘harmony’ as an overarching selection force in the evolution of life:
‘health, strength, and long life are the results of a harmony between the
individual and the universe that surrounds it’. For Wallace, a plant or
animal is in harmony with its environment when it is well-matched to it.
When the environment changes, a species can fall out of harmony.
Natural selection can return an animal species to harmony with a
changing universe, ‘like the governor of a steam engine’,101 but only
through slow change over many generations. In contrast, Wallace notes
that ‘man is kept in harmony by his mind’.102
In The Descent of Man, Darwin quotes Wallace, saying that ‘man is
enabled through his mental faculties to keep with an unchanged body in
harmony with the changing universe’.103 The concept of harmony here
is clear enough: organisms that better harmonise with their environment will ﬂourish. In the classical meaning,104 harmony is deﬁned as
the joining together of diverse elements into a well-ﬁtted whole: so,
‘survival of the ﬁttest’ could also reasonably be termed ‘survival of the
harmonised’.
Harmony is an important concept in many cultures, including in indigenous spiritual systems in the Americas and in Africa. Historically, the
concept emerged as a dominant philosophical theme almost simultaneously

Wallace provides an early view on cybernetics or control theory: ‘The action of
this principle is exactly like that of the centrifugal governor of the steam engine,
which checks and corrects any irregularities almost before they become evident;
and in like manner no unbalanced deﬁciency in the animal kingdom can ever reach
any conspicuous magnitude, because it would make itself felt at the very ﬁrst step,
by rendering existence difﬁcult and extinction almost sure soon to follow’, Alfred
Russel Wallace, ‘On the tendency of varieties to depart indeﬁnitely from the
original type’ (Ternate, February 1858), ed. Charles H. Smith, http://people.wku
.edu/charles.smith/wallace/S043.htm.
102
Wallace, ‘The origin of human races’, 160 and 184.
103
Darwin, The Descent of Man, Part 1, ch. 5, p. 158.
104
This history is represented with astonishing clarity – and a direct call to revolution – in HRH the Prince of Wales, T. Juniper, and I. Skelly, Harmony: A New Way
of Looking at Our World (London: Harper Collins, 2010).
101

214

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:22 Page Number: 215

The Enigma of Mind

around 550 BC in ancient China105 and in ancient Greece,106 a coincidence
perhaps comparable to the simultaneous discovery of Darwinism. While
the concept of ‘harmony’ might strike some as unscientiﬁc, it actually
played a key role in the development of the Western sciences.
The ﬁrst known empirical philosophers in the Western tradition were
the Greek Pythagoreans (c. 500 BC), who were known for their mathematical theory of harmony.107 While previous thinkers had proposed that the
world was fundamentally made of elements like air, water, ﬁre, or aether,
the Pythagoreans believed that the cosmos was made of mathematical
structure. As a result, they believed that natural harmonies in mathematics
should manifest themselves within the physical cosmos. This viewpoint is
still provocative today, in part because it seems to integrate an immaterial
or even spiritual perspective with scientiﬁc inquiry and mathematics.
Notably, the Pythagoreans tested their mathematical model of harmony in what appears to be the ﬁrst documented scientiﬁc experiment.
The historian Leonid Zhmud explains that ‘Hippasus [c. 530–450 BC]
conducted an experiment with bronze discs, conﬁrming the numerical
expressions of the principal concords discovered by Pythagoras, 2:1 for
the octave, 3:2 for the ﬁfth, and 4:3 for the fourth.’108 The Pythagoreans
empirically demonstrated that a bronze chime twice the thickness (ratio
of 1:2) of another made a musical octave while a chime 150 per cent
thicker (ratio of 2:3) played a musical ﬁfth, and so on. These simple
combinations of pure numbers were also found in the ratios used to
tune stringed instruments. For instance, a guitar string pressed at half
the length will play an octave higher, at a ratio of 2:1. These early
105

In sixth-century BC China, Confucians and Daoists believed that harmony
described the joining of diversity into wholeness – it wasn’t the elimination of
differences or ‘sameness’, it was a coherent integration of variety, like a soup with
many contrasting ingredients, coming together as a whole. See C. Li, ‘The
philosophy of harmony in classical Confucianism’, Philosophy Compass, 3(3)
(2008), 423–435.
106
Philolaus (470–385 BC), born 100 years after Pythagoras (c. 570–495 BC), was the
ﬁrst Pythagorean known to write about harmony: ‘Harmony is generally the
result of contraries: for it is the unity of multiplicity, and the agreement of
discordances’ (Nicomachus, Arith. Intr., 2. 509, DK 10).
107
The terms ‘philosophy’ and ‘cosmos’ are attributed to Pythagoras. See C. Riedweg,
Pythagoras: His Life, Teaching, and Inﬂuence (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
2008).
108
L. Zhmud, ‘Aristoxenus and the Pythagoreans’, in C. Huffman (ed.), Aristoxenus of
Tarentum: Discussion (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 2012), pp. 223–249.

215

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:22 Page Number: 216

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

experiments provided empirical evidence to support the Pythagorean
hypothesis, that transcendent mathematical relationships govern the
material universe and are manifested as literal harmonies in the physical
cosmos as well as in the mind.109
Evidence from contemporary neuroscience suggests that the
Pythagorean hypothesis may be worthy of some further consideration.
For instance, the brain is not just rhythmic, it is also profoundly harmonic.
Electrical brainwaves are structured by doublings of frequency – in music,
these doublings are known as octaves. Just as an octave above middle
A (440 Hz) is 880 Hz, each brainwave band is roughly double in frequency:
gamma brainwaves are roughly double the frequency of beta waves, which
are roughly double the frequency of alpha waves, and so on. These
doublings support periodic synchrony; for instance, the peaks of one
frequency’s wave can ‘kiss’ the peaks of another frequency’s wave every
other cycle. In this manner, harmonic ratios support periodic synchrony
and coupling between neural circuits. Because irrational ratios can prevent
synchrony, famous irrational ratios like the golden mean have been proposed as mechanisms useful for preventing interference between different
neural functions.110 For example, functions at ‘high theta’ won’t interfere
with functions at ‘low theta’ if the high and low frequencies are separated
by a ratio of the golden mean.
The harmonic structure of the brain can be described as a nested
hierarchy of frequency couplings. By analogy, consider how the rapid play
of a violin can ﬁt within the slower frequencies of the musical pulse
indicated by a conductor’s baton: in the same way, rapid, localised ~40
Hz gamma cycles can ﬁt (or nest) into the brain-wide metrical structure of
~4 Hz theta oscillations. Thus, local and global frequencies can be coupled
together through a nested hierarchy of periodic phase synchrony.111

109

J. Godwin, The Harmony of the Spheres: A Sourcebook of the Pythagorean Tradition in
Music (Rochester, NY: Inner Traditions International, 1993); A. Balbi, The Music of
the Big Bang: The Cosmic Microwave Background and the New Cosmology (Berlin and
London: Springer Science & Business Media, 2008).
110
B. Pletzer, H. Kerschbaum, and W. Klimesch, ‘When frequencies never synchronize: The golden mean and the resting EEG’, Brain Research, 1335 (2010), 91–102.
111
P. Uhlhaas, G. Pipa, B. Lima, L. Melloni, S. Neuenschwander et al., ‘Neural
synchrony in cortical networks: History, concept and current status’, Frontiers in
Integrative Neuroscience, 3 (2009), article 17.

216

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:22 Page Number: 217

The Enigma of Mind

When different neural circuits ﬁre in synchrony, they are perceived together
in consciousness;112 long-range synchronisation is understood as the binding force for the perception of smaller ‘nested’ elements. For instance, neural
synchrony in the imagination blends and synthesises different concepts into
new concepts.113 Oscillatory chunks of language are merged together
through rhythmic nested synchrony – phonemes nested in syllables nested
in words nested in phrases and so on.114
It is this dynamic, hierarchical harmony – the symphony of the brain –
that seems to generate the integrated uniﬁed nature of conscious experience.115 As neuroscientists seek a ‘common currency’116 to explain the
link between immaterial mental experiences and physical brain activities,
the concept of harmony is a strong candidate for this common currency.
Scientists have even discovered that electrical oscillations in the brain can
produce so-called ‘harmonic modes’:117 electrical patterns resembling the
beautiful patterns of sand that can emerge on a vibrating Chladni plate.
Science is only beginning to unravel how the brain’s massive hierarchy of
neural oscillation ﬁts together in a rhythmic, metrical structure. While
much remains to be discovered, mathematical principles of harmony
really do seem to be manifested in the brain. Pythagoreans can be proud.
But even if principles of harmony operate in the brain and mind, what
makes harmony a selection pressure? A guitar string offers a simple
illustration. When a guitar string is plucked, a massive range of initial
frequencies are generated, but only the ﬁt will survive;118 that is, only the
A. K. Engel and W. Singer, ‘Temporal binding and the neural correlates of sensory
awareness’, Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5(1) (2001), 16–25.
A. Vyshedskiy and R. Dunn, ‘Mental synthesis involves the synchronization of
independent neuronal ensembles’, Research Ideas and Outcomes, 1 (2015), article
e7642.
114
G. Buzsáki, The Brain from Inside Out (New York, NY: Oxford University Press,
2019), ch. 6.
115
F. Varela, J.-P. Lachaux, E. Rodriguez, and J. Martinerie, ‘The brainweb: Phase
synchronization and large-scale integration’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2(4)
(2001), 229–239.
116
G. Northoff, S. Wainio-Theberge, and K. Evers, ‘Is temporo-spatial dynamics the
“common currency” of brain and mind? In quest of “Spatiotemporal Neuroscience”’,
Physics of Life Reviews, 33 (2019), 34–54.
117
S. Atasoy, I. Donnelly, and J. Pearson, ‘Human brain networks function in
connectome-speciﬁc harmonic waves’, Nature Communications, 7(1) (2016), 1–10.
118
D. A. Jaffe and J. O. Smith, ‘Extensions of the Karplus–Strong plucked-string
algorithm’, Computer Music Journal, 7(2) (1983), 56–69.
112
113

217

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:22 Page Number: 218

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

vibrations with wavelengths literally ﬁtting the length of the string will
be ampliﬁed. All other frequencies will be damped. These frequencies are
the string’s fundamental frequency and its harmonics. Thus, a ‘survival of
the harmonised’ process operates; from among a multitude of frequencies,
harmony selects only those that ﬁt the length of the string. Notably, it is
this selection process that gives rise to the overall sound of a guitar. By
direct analogy, rhythmic elements in the brain that do not ﬁt or harmonise with dominant neural rhythms will be unable to enter conscious
awareness.119 In this way, we hypothesise that harmony serves as a
‘ﬁtness function’ for the brain: neural circuits are tuned through selection
forces to maximise harmony.
We have been speaking of harmony in the brain, but what about
harmony in human experience? In everyday mental experiences, harmony
offers a powerful and intuitive description of several deep and vital human
motivations. For instance, harmony is deeply linked to ‘happiness’ as an
encompassing driver of human experience. When researchers gathered
open-ended deﬁnitions of happiness from nearly 3,000 adults (from
Argentina, Brazil, Croatia, Hungary, India, Italy, Mexico, New Zealand,
Norway, Portugal, South Africa, and the United States), they found that
‘inner harmony’ was the most common everyday ‘lay-person’ deﬁnition of
happiness.120 A harmonious state of mind is indeed a pleasant one – yet
we also need tension and unpleasant ‘cognitive dissonance’ to motivate
actions that return us to states of greater harmony.121 After all, the best
music relies on dissonance and the best stories rely on narrative tension;
harmony appears to be greater when there are discords to harmonise or
challenges to overcome.
There may be more extreme states of mental harmony, as well. Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi describes the trance-like peak experience of top performers, the so-called ﬂow states, using the concept of harmony: ‘Flow is
P. Fries, ‘Rhythms for cognition: Communication through coherence’, Neuron, 88
(1) (2015), 220–235; R. F. Helfrich, A. Breska, and R. T. Knight, ‘Neural entrainment and network resonance in support of top-down guided attention’, Current
Opinion in Psychology, 29 (2019), 82–89.
120
A. Delle Fave, I. Brdar, M. P. Wissing, U. Araujo, A. Castro Solano et al., ‘Lay
deﬁnitions of happiness across nations: The primacy of inner harmony and relational connectedness’, Frontiers in Psychology, 7 (2016), 30.
121
B. Weiner, Human Motivation (London: Psychology Press, 2013), p. 305.
119

218

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:22 Page Number: 219

The Enigma of Mind

the way people describe their state of mind when consciousness is harmoniously ordered.’122 Flow states don’t occur when one is distracted or
when one’s attention is split; they occur only when a performer interacts
whole-mindedly with the demands of their environment. When there is a
dynamic match between a person’s skill and the demands of the task, this
can result in a state of harmony or ‘ﬂow’. An example could be conjured in
the image of a skilled musician entranced in an effortless union of mind
and sound, where thought is not needed to determine placement of
ﬁngers upon a fretboard – rather, the music seems to emerge from a
direct link between the mind and the instrument.
Extending the analogy of the musician, a group ﬂow or harmony in
improvisational music (‘jamming’) depends upon a harmonious balance of
listening, feeling, and generation by each individual musician. When a
group harmony is achieved, the intersection of diverse individual musical
ideas is profoundly uniﬁed. New ideas may need to resonate in order to
reproduce, but it is through selection-by-harmony that they can evolve to
ﬁt within the context of a larger social system.
Harmony does not only occur in the brain or within individual experiences, it also manifests itself as the social harmony that binds people
together in community. Individual actions that ﬁt the expectations of a
larger social group are less likely to be dampened and extinguished. Some
behaviours harmonise with the rhythms of other people, and some don’t.
People seek interpersonal harmony with each other because it feels good –
and because alignment into friendships and larger social groups generally
supports individual health and reproductive success. The attunement of
people within social groups appears to be necessary for joint attention,123
coordinated action, and shared intention. Harmony, as a selection pressure in the evolution of the social mind, may have enabled more collaborative behaviours and larger social groups. Groups of humans that don’t
harmonise will have more conﬂict and fragment over time, whereas

122
123

M. Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience (New York, NY:
Harper & Row, 1990).
M. Tomasello, M. Carpenter, J. Call, T. Beyne, and H. Moll, ‘Understanding and
sharing intentions: The origins of cultural cognition’, Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
28(5) (2005), 675–691.

219

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:22 Page Number: 220

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

groups that harmonise well may grow ever larger. Over time, then,
harmonious groups may come to dominate the less harmonious.
One critique of harmony is that it isn’t a scientiﬁc concept. Yet, during
the European Enlightenment, the notion of harmony and scientiﬁc
humanism were closely aligned. Alexander von Humboldt, the world
explorer and inspiration to Darwin, named his masterpiece of science
Kosmos as a reference to the Pythagorean philosophy. Similarly, both
Copernicus and Newton credited Pythagoreans for their greatest
insights.124 Other scientists, like Galileo, Kepler, Descartes, Spinoza,
and Hooke (among many others) scientiﬁcally investigated harmony. In
the ﬁrst years of the early Royal Society, for instance, there were dozens
of experiments conducted on the science of harmony.125
For a variety of esoteric reasons,126 the concept of harmony has largely
fallen out of consideration in the sciences. Even Karl Popper was critical
of it.127 Richard Dawkins referred to the idea of ecological harmony
between species as ‘dotty mysticism’.128 Perhaps. But, if this classical
concept motivates people to seek inner harmony, to design a more
harmonious global society,129 and to pursue a more lasting harmony
with nature, perhaps it should be understood better through authentic
scientiﬁc inquiry:
Nature itself is a harmonic system . . . if we ignore the principles that
sustain that harmony, nature’s essential balance and equilibrium become
quite literally disordered.130

J. E. McGuire and P. M. Rattansi, ‘Newton and the “Pipes of Pan”’, Notes and
Records of the Royal Society of London, 21(2) (1966), 108–143.
125
P. Gouk, Music, Science and Natural Magic in Seventeenth-Century England (New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1999).
126
W. J. Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy: Rejected Knowledge in Western Culture
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012).
127
But perhaps due to a misunderstanding, as discussed in C. Li and D. Düring,
‘Harmony: Origin of totalitarianism or patron of pluralism’, Journal of East–West
Thought, 10(2) (2020), 1–9.
128
R. Dawkins and Y. Wong, The Ancestor’s Tale: A Pilgrimage to the Dawn of Life
(London: Hachette, 2016).
129
D. Mahiet, ‘Rethinking harmony in international relations’, Journal of International
Political Theory, 17(3) (2021), 257–275.
130
HRH the Prince of Wales, Juniper and Skelly, Harmony.
124

220

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:22 Page Number: 221

The Enigma of Mind

Synopsis
Do evolutionary forces operate within the human mind? In this chapter,
we have examined factors in conscious experience that support variation,
reproduction, and selection: the key ingredients for natural selection. We
propose that imagination provides a key source of variety in human experience. We propose that sympathy serves as a powerful mechanism for the
replication of conscious experiences. Finally, we propose that principles of
harmony govern the selection of mental experiences, both within individuals and within collective consciousness.
Looking across the world today, we see the results of a mere ~70,000
years of cultural adaptation from the moment our modern human ancestors left Africa to populate the lands beyond. A band of possibly fewer
than 1,000 individuals crossed the Red Sea strait and began the lasting
migration wave that would disperse humanity over mountains, across
oceans, and onto every corner of habitable land that this planet has to
offer. In the generations that followed, many conditions led to a diverse
set of human experiences that inﬂuenced a seemingly endless variety of
experiments in culture. Empires rose and fell, societies formed and dissolved, and ideas were born and transformed through it all. What we are
left with is an archaeological library of human imagination.
As a species, we will always need to create new ways of thinking in
order to adapt to our continuously changing realities. Now, in a time
where globalisation and the information revolution have dissolved geographical boundaries of knowledge exchange, there may be a rational and
appropriate need to reﬂect on our longstanding relationship with the
boundaries of the mind, to expand our imagination of the universe and to
seek a more harmonious future for ourselves within it.
Further scientiﬁc discovery can reveal how resonance and harmony
shape our universe and how they relate to each other and to other basic
concepts like entropy and the ﬂow of free energy. Understanding these
forces will surely inform the continued evolution of humanity. We are
humbled by the complexity of the emergence of new realities within the
mind – the birth of new ideas remains a mystery. The enigma of our
imagination may be as elusive as the origin of life; by exploring this
enigma, we seek the spirit of human inspiration. From the shaman’s drum

221

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:22 Page Number: 222

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

in Mongolia to the sakau stones in Micronesia, we have as a species been
driven to evolve as explorers of the mind. By continuing to redeﬁne the
boundaries of our conscious experience, we can forge and formulate
reality itself.
Epilogue: The Continuing Frontier
In the ﬁeld of biomimetics, lessons from nature are used to inform
engineering. How might we build upon the evolution of cultural rituals
and cognitive technologies to inform the design of new and transformative experiences today?
A. Lin personal account – In late March of 2019, during the spring
equinox, I was invited to a private installation deep within the Yucatán
jungles of Mexico. It was designed by the landscape artist James Turrell
and built by conservationists/explorers Roberto Hernández and Claudia
Madrazo Hernández with a philosophical grounding in Maya cosmology.
It was described to me as a technology to facilitate connection to the
cosmos and the binding forces in nature. The installation consisted of a
massive stone pyramid built over an underground cenote (a naturally
formed limestone cavern deep enough to access groundwater). The interior of the pyramid framed a series of internal spaces, each designed to
challenge and ‘unlock the mind’.
Embedded at the centre of the base layer was a voluminous space
that, due to the lack of corners, gave the illusion of having no end. From
no speciﬁc source, a perfectly ubiquitous light shifted in colour almost
imperceptibly. My hosts referred to this as ‘The Ganzfeld’ (Figure 8.8).
They instructed me to sit quietly and stare into the seemingly endless
abyss – an entrancing, amorphous canvas of formless space with nothing in it but us. Then, we took a small series of stairs (Figure 8.9) to a
half-spherical space referred to as ‘The Metasphere’. We lay on our
backs on top of a circular platform and stared into the dimly glowing
dome above. Suddenly, the sea of diffuse light began to oscillate and
ﬂicker from alternating hidden sources. As I stared into the pulsing
featureless space, I saw morphing multicolour images emerge like a
dance of constructive and destructive interference patterns in my mind.
I heard an audio signal at a similar alternating frequency – it pulsed and

222

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:22 Page Number: 223

The Enigma of Mind

F I G U R E 8 . 8 ‘Ganz ﬁeld’ inside the pyramid in the Yucatán jungles of
Mexico (designed by James Turrell; built by Roberto Hernández and Claudia Madrazo
Hernández). Photo: Albert Lin.

hummed and seemed to entangle itself in my mental images. I was told
that the frequencies were attuned to disrupt the normal rhythmic
operation of my brain.
When we reached the third level, we saw a dark and cavernous room
holding the ‘skyspace’ – a starkly cut elliptical view of the sky that was
framed sharply on all sides by pulsing diffuse lights ﬁlling the interior of
the space (Figure 8.10). A ﬁnal minimal staircase rose to the opening,
giving way to a reﬂection pool situated on top of the pyramid
(Figure 8.11). From the top of the steps, we emerged from the interior
to witness the endless jungle horizon. Even the colours and sounds of the
jungle seemed signiﬁcantly brighter upon emerging from the pyramid.
We sat just below the skyspace as the sky tone shifted with the setting
sun. The boundaries of both colour and depth played unexplainable
games with my perception.

223

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:23 Page Number: 224

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

F I G U R E 8 . 9 Channel through the heart of the pyramid into the cenote.

Photo: Albert Lin.

224

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:24 Page Number: 225

The Enigma of Mind

F I G U R E 8 . 1 0 The ‘Skyspace’ inside the pyramid (the grey oval is open

sky). Photo: Albert Lin.

225

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:24 Page Number: 226

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

F I G U R E 8 . 1 1 Reﬂection pool on the top level of the pyramid. Photo:

Albert Lin.

226

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:25 Page Number: 227

The Enigma of Mind

F I G U R E 8 . 1 2 Light hitting the cenote surface within the pyramid. Photo:

Albert Lin.

A single long channel led from the top of the pyramid down several
hundred feet to the dark blue waters of the natural cenote below
(Figure 8.12). I will never forget those few minutes during the
spring equinox when a stunning beam of sunlight travelled through the
incense-ﬁlled heart of the pyramid and exploded into the rippling,
clear waters.
Over the course of three days, my experience there was punctuated
only by the rhythms of ceremony, the simple ritual of eating small meals
and our ongoing discussion of the cosmos and our relationship to it.
Without any entheogenic substances, this otherworldly and existential
experience – generated through architecture, immersive light, and conversation – was enveloping to the point of mystical ego-death.
This experience shows how the design of new cognitive technologies
might tap into the more existential aspects of the human mind. The
frontiers of this very human quest will surely be advanced by many

227

Comp. by: P. Udayasankar Stage: Proof Chapter No.: 8 Title Name: WardandReuvers
Date:25/4/22 Time:07:01:26 Page Number: 228

Albert Y.-M. Lin and J. Derek Lomas

explorers of art, technology, science, and philosophy. With a greater
understanding of imagination, sympathetic resonance, and harmony,
how might we envision new designs that could enlighten our experience
and aid our evolution as a more resilient and harmonious species?
The Earth has never been more connected together at a global scale.
Yet the world can feel, at times, profoundly disconnected. We have
seemingly inﬁnite access to information and experience – all the great
works of science, literature, music, ﬁlm, and more – yet it is rare to
participate in the physical, embodied group ritual experiences that have
generally held societies together in the past. Dancing together is powerful but, in 2021, it is deeply provocative. As humans – if we have the
capacity – do we also have the responsibility to imagine new ceremonies,
rituals, or technologies that could help bind together our future societies?
We leave this discussion wondering what resonant experiences might
enable humans to better harmonise with each other and with the everchanging natural world. Most of all, we continue to wonder, where will
our collective imagination take us next?
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Ramesh Rao, Vilayanur Subramanian
Ramachandran, Sheldon Brown, Johan Reinhard, Timothy Furnish,
Fadel Zeidan, Adam Halberstad, Mark Geyer, Cassandra Vieten,
Patrick Colman, Mark Meyers, Tim Kelly, Eliah Aronoff-Spencer,
Thomas Garrison, Lee Stein, Roberto and Claudia Hernández, Clara
Wu, Wade Davis, Leo Trottier, Tanner Cusick, Deborah Forester,
Adam Safron, Tim Mullen, Patrick Cooper, Michael Skirpan, Don
Norman, P. J. Stappers, Paul Hekkert, Caiseal Beardow, Emily Cross,
Paul Stamets, Harry Diakoff, Julika Lomas, Tommy Cohen, and Pascal
Gagneux for their intellectual contribution, guidance, and support in our
explorations. We would also like to thank Emily Joan Ward, Janet
Gibson, and Andrew Fabian for the honour of being invited to present
our work in this esteemed lecture series. We dedicate this chapter to our
respective fathers, Douglas Lin and Robert Lomas, who inspired us to
explore and contemplate the furthest realms of our imagination, and thus
our universe.

228

