CHAPTER 1
Rebirthday

San Diego, California. September 24th, 2016. So much stems from this day, so we may as well begin here.

Millie caught her first fish in swim diapers. She was three years old.

I was tending the grill under the weathered beach umbrella that lived permanently in the bed of my truck, half-watching Charlie and my friend Adam's son Westy chase each other along the water's edge. Millie had been asking me to help her, but I was hunched over our tiny camping grill trying to keep it from tipping as I turned the chicken legs I was making us for lunch. As a single father of two small kids, I was unreasonably obsessed with getting protein into them so they'd "grow up strong." The same instinct had once led me to follow their mother, Kara, around with tiny packets of iodized salt to sneak into her food when she was pregnant because I'd read it was good for brain development. My tendency toward enthusiastic obsessiveness was probably part of why it didn't work out for us.

Every time I looked up from the grill, Millie was one step further along on her own. She'd gone down to the shore, pulled a ghost shrimp from the sand with a PVC pipe pump I'd made her, baited the hook with the poor tiny lobster-like crustacean, lifted her Elsa-themed fishing rod and cast it into the shallows. She'd done the whole thing by herself while I was busy trying not to set the chicken on fire. The next thing I knew, she was running toward me with a ten-inch wiggling spotted bay bass in her hand.

"Dad! Dad, I got one!"

Charlie ran over to see. "Wow, great job Millie!" he said with genuine pride for his little sister. She held it high, involuntarily jumping with joy as she made earnest attempts to get the hook out of the fish's tortured mouth. I knelt beside her to help, but she asked to release it back into the water herself. *I have a fishing buddy,* I thought.

That was Millie. Three years old, swim diapers, Elsa fishing rod, and already determined enough to do everything herself.

It had been a good day. The kind I'd learned not to take for granted. And not the kind of day when your whole world shifts. My career with National Geographic seemed to be taking off, three years spent on a high-tech search for Genghis Khan's tomb, followed by the beginnings of laser mapping in the Maya jungles of Guatemala. But my marriage had ended a year ago, and now I was solo, splitting time between two worlds: ancient graves and pyramids one week, days at the bay with two kids in the other. In truth I was trying to hold my family together at the seams. On this Saturday afternoon, the most important discovery in the world was a three-year-old girl with a ghost shrimp and a tiny pink fishing rod.

Barely two weeks before this perfect day at the bay, Bruna had entered the picture. We'd known each other for months, circling without quite landing. But that first kiss changed everything. For the first time since the divorce, I could see a version of my future that wasn't just white-knuckling it alone.

She showed up as the afternoon heat started to lift off the water, walked across the grass and went straight to the kids, scooped Millie up, made Charlie laugh with some tickles to his belly, and dropped into our world like she'd always belonged in it.

As the evening approached, Adam invited us back to his parents' place, a farmhouse out east of the city where the late-summer heat intensified. The kids jumped in the pool while Adam's father poured chilled wine on the patio.

The warm evening light caught Charlie's face as he climbed out of the water. He had always been steady, still a goofball, but conscientiously empathetic. He and his sister had absorbed the upheaval of the last couple years and come through it, almost clearer, like life was polishing what was within them into focus. I had never wanted it to happen this way, but we were figuring it out. In that moment, as Charlie flew through the air in perfect cannonball form, he was still just a happy kid.

A few moments later Adam began loading the kids into the "Rhino," a squat four-by-four, half tractor, half dune buggy.

"Quick ride, they'll love it!" he said with a heartfelt smile.

There wasn't a lot of room, so Bruna stayed behind. I climbed into the passenger seat with Millie on my lap and Adam's daughter Winter next to her. Charlie and Westy were buckled in back. Everything was exactly right, for a moment. We headed up a dirt track behind the house, Adam steering in playful arcs, dust kicking up behind us. The kids laughed with excitement, and so did I.

One turn.

Another.

The third, the world turned. A lurch. Momentum tipping just a hair too far. The force that held a body to the earth, and the earth to the sun, let go all at once. Everything slowed. The Rhino tilting. My foot shooting out to stop the roll from instinct.

Going. Going.

Ground rushing up. Metal meeting bone.

Then silence.

Dust. A ringing that swallowed everything. The sound of thunder from underwater.

I couldn't see. I couldn't move. My body suspended in something thick and formless, fighting to surface. *Where are the kids?*

The ringing faded. Through the haze, Millie's face. Terrified. Screaming through the dirt, Winter over her shoulder. I wanted to reach for her but couldn't move, at least they didn't look badly hurt.

I couldn't turn my body to look for Charlie.

Adam above me.

Then he looked down. "Oh my god." He said it again. And again.

"Where - are - the - boys!?" I quietly screamed, my voice unable to find its wind.

"They are okay!" he said, panicked. "Oh my god..."

They dangled in their seat belts behind me like ornaments on a tree.

Adrenaline did something superhuman to Adam. He got Charlie and Westy down safely and then somehow lifted the vehicle with one arm and dragged me free with the other. That's when I saw what was left of my leg. My foot jutting at an angle that doesn't exist in nature. What had been my shin was now open flesh and a million splinters of bone ground into the dirt.

"Get - the - kids - out - of - here!" I forced it out.

I could feel them looking back for me as he pulled them toward the house.

Then I was alone.

An immense sensation of pressure, and above, just the sky and a silence so total the world seemed to have stopped turning.

Images began to flash through my mind. I saw myself on horseback, galloping flat out across the Mongolian steppe, dust blooming behind, the crew yelling and whooping, my body part of the horse and the horse part of the earth and all of it moving as one thing. Was that gone now? Something I would never experience again?

My bones were in the dirt.

I looked down. A glitch in my mind wouldn't let me register what I was seeing.

Other thoughts swirled. Hiking with my children through the desert, Charlie explaining the constellations to his sister. Millie standing on my feet in a deeply worn and tattered princess dress while I held her hands and we danced to her favorite song. Sledding, or one day teaching them to ski as my dad had done for me, gone too?

I'd just started to believe it was all going to work. Now my body lay in a shattered pool of blood and dirt.

In the silence all I could hear was the sound of my heartbeat in my skull as my future seemed to be seeping out of me, into the earth.

Then the muffled footsteps of someone running broke through.

Bruna dropped to her knees beside me, shaking. She took my head in her lap. Her eyes locked on mine and the world narrowed to just her face. For whatever reason, maybe an instinctual reaction, she started chanting.

"Om. Om. Om."

I could feel it in her body against my skull. My jaw was clenched so tight the sound barely got through, a grimace shaped into something between a groan and a cry. But as hard as it was, I just kept chanting with her. I'd seen the symbol of Om before, on a medallion a Sherpa had pressed into my hand in Tibet years ago, and on the kitschy tapestries that hung in college dorm rooms. But I hadn't really understood it then, and I didn't understand it now. It was just a sound, yet the only thing keeping me breathing in a rhythm as the pressure from my wound closed in, the defense mechanisms of my body going into shock.

"Om... Om..."

Five minutes. Maybe thirty. Time had stopped meaning anything. The heat was still rising off the ground. My children were inside a house they had never been to before, wondering what had happened to their father. And a woman I'd been with for barely two weeks was cradling me in her hands, as the sound of our chants wrapped around us.

It was probably an hour before the sirens came, but when they arrived the paramedics moved fast. Injections of something in my thigh, scraped onto a stretcher, headed toward the ambulance. I saw Charlie and Millie in the doorway of the house. "Bring me to them first," I asked the paramedics. Charlie had his arms around Millie, who was nervously picking at her fingers.

"Don't worry," I told them. "It'll all be okay." Kara was far away. The kids were about to have their first sleepover, unplanned. It wasn't supposed to be this way.

The last of the daylight was splitting into bands of gold and shadow across the hills as they loaded me into the ambulance. Then the doors closed. That's when the pain finally broke over me like a giant wave. I gripped Bruna's hand and slipped between consciousness and darkness, the world I knew falling away.

Om.

---

In the weeks to come, my leg would be amputated below the knee. The life I'd known would be gone.

What replaced it would be a journey. A search through landscapes and lecture halls that held the oldest questions our species has ever asked. It would carry me through ruins hidden in jungles for a thousand years, onto sacred mountains where civilizations were born, and through ceremonies that modern science was only beginning to explore. Life itself would become the ceremony.

---

Somewhere in the darkness of that ambulance, as the sirens wailed, a memory surfaced from long ago.

A road through the pines. A trading post to get supplies. I was eight years old in the passenger seat, my father was trying to explain something to me about the beginning of everything. How in the first instant after the Big Bang, nearly everything that was created was immediately destroyed. Matter and antimatter annihilating each other in equal measure. But not exactly equal. For every billion particles that canceled out, one extra particle of matter remained. From that margin, that sliver of something over nothing, everything that exists was born.

The ambulance was carrying me now, a small spaceship of blinking lights and strangers' hands, hurtling through the darkness between a life I had known and what was to come. My leg was shattered. The sound of the chant was still vibrating in my chest. What is it, at the bottom of everything, that holds? Somewhere in between what I had been and what I was to become, I was about to find out.


PART I — THE GROUND

'Caminante, no hay camino. Se hace camino al andar.' Wanderer, there is no road. The road is made as you walk.
—Antonio Machado, Campos de Castilla, 1917
