CHAPTER 22
The Boy and the Butterfly

One afternoon Charlie walked past my mother’s piano, stopped, and sat down at the bench.

He had not played much before his accident, just messing around here and there. Yet what came from the piano was a complete melody. Notes I had never heard him play.

I stood in the doorway watching. He finished, looked over at me, and grinned.

“My brain feels like a phone that’s been completely wiped of its apps,” he said. “There’s no noise. I can see the patterns easily.”

The accident had cleared the slate, and from wherever he had been, he had brought music back with him. And the buds of his identity were growing from it.

It was spring in Southern California.

---

When we had first arrived home from the hospital, the door was covered in notes from our neighbors. He held them carefully, looking over each one with genuine gratitude.

His balance off, the vestibule system in his brain was injured. His eyes had lost their left periphery, so his head stayed in a constant slight tilt to compensate. And he had no idea where he was one hour to the next, everything about how we lived needed to be reconsidered.

Rich installed a gate at the top of the stairs the day before we came home. I made Charlie sleep next to me so that if he rose in the night I could make sure he didn’t fall. Like his shadow, whenever he moved I walked behind him with a hand hooked in the back of his belt for support. It was like ten years had cycled to moment I had been brought home into the care of my community, only now it was my son who was doing it.

While his face looked the same, something had changed. They called it an “invisible injury” because the scars were on the inside. But you could hear it in his voice. An endless mumbling stream of thought, observations, and processings pouring out of him as he worked to figure out the world again.

His neurologist called it *perseveration* and suggested we put him on a medication to quiet it, temper his impulses as his frontal lobe had been impacted.

I refused. The drug would have masked it and made him duller. He needed the opposite, periods of more brain activity mixed with periods rest to regenerate. The rambling would sort itself out once impulse control rewired. Besides, I liked his rambling. It was better than the silence we had emerged from, and it wasn’t nonsense.

He would stare at tiny caterpillars eggs on a milkweed leaf for hours. To me they were just white dots. But To him they held the potential magic of the universe, and he was sharing the gift of what he saw. It was like seeing through the fresh eyes of a newborn who could articulate their wonder of the world with the words of a teenager. I bought every milkweed plant we could find.

This would be the staging ground.

The hospital had done the rebirth. Home was the second part, the metamorphosis.

Six months to build a brain they’d said. Yet it was more than a brain, it was the person within it.

Who would he become?

---

While he was receiving the world from the outside, a deeper memory arrived from the other direction.

The first time he said anything about the coma was days after he’d woke. There were only a handful of words.

He had seen a ton of light. And remembered a feeling. He called the feeling *stoke.* Then he passed back out.

Now his ability to speak had returned, and more came.

A white void.

A classic park bench to the front and right. Deep familiarity, inviting. A feeling like looking at the door of your own home or being in your own skin.

He didn’t sit on the bench.

“It wasn’t a choice, it just didn’t happen. And when I think of it I didn’t really have a body either.” He recollected like from the fog of a dream.

“There was a brightness and a love, not like the love you have between people, but the love that things are made of.”

He told me this deadpan, innocent and unassuming. Just what he had seen and felt at the edge of life and death.

A year before, Jamie told me about the places she was visiting in the days as she approached death. “Regular day stuff,” she said. “Just better lighting and glittery.” I wonder if that as the stoke.

Many could argue it was just the brain doing what brains do during a near death experience. A surge of gamma activity in the last minutes, along with a release of serotonin and dopamine, the chemicals of euphoria.

That does happen, but the threshold between life and death has a magic. I have felt it many times. At Jamie’s last breath, and Charlie’s first off the ventilator. It had been in the delivery rooms of my two kids and in the moment of my amputation. I had felt the light thicken, like the thoughts from friends around the world were pouring into a focal point while the vail between this world and whatever is beyond it had thinned to the point that I could feel an underlying love surrounding *everything*. I could almost sweep my hands through it.

But who is to say which was causing the other, were those experiences caused by a chemical release in my brain or the other way around. I mean is the beauty of a sunrise made from a chemical dump in our brain or is the release caused by the beauty of the sunrise?

It didn’t really matter anyway. All I know was that it now lived in Charlie, and it was presenting as empathy. He wouldn’t kill an ant.

From the start I was clear this journey would be about trying to make sense of the invisible. That was what I had been doing my whole professional life.

---

The Drs had told us to try to create a space of consistency and calm for the early stage of recovery so Kara and I decided split responsibilities to maximize that. She would keep Millie’s school routine going while I would focus on home therapy with Charlie. He needed constant attention at first. That was a hard call for everyone, but they would all come to visit regularly.

Laura said she would fend off the emails. I needed help so Johnny moved into the guest room, brothers in arms for the journey ahead. And suddenly my own boy was the expedition.

Qasim came to visit that first week, an unexpected messenger. Jamie had introduced him to the crew in the epic desert jam of my fortieth birthday, and in the years I had known him since we had become close. But beneath his happy character he had never shared that he had suffered through his own brain injury journey, alone.

“Post-concussion syndrome years before, not like Charlie’s but still serious,” he told me as if admitting something. “Light hurting my eyes. Loud sounds debilitating. Balance and coordination.”

Before we had met, he had gone through it in isolation, and it had almost crushed him.

“It was so fucking hard to talk about,” he said. “It took years… maybe I didn’t know how to talk about it. So I just hid it. Brutal.”

Then he turned to Charlie and spoke almost as if to himself.

“No one believed me, no one could see the scars to prove it was really happening but I could feel them in the ways my mind wasn’t working right.”

After an exhaustive search Qasim had found a small clinic in Utah called Cognitive FX, where its founder Dr. Alina Fong used fMRI scans to guide intensive therapy sprints. “Finally, someone who could help me see it.”

His scans came back with some regions glowing too bright and others barely lighting at all.

“Pathways can break,” he recalled her saying. “But the signal underneath is still strong enough to carve new routes around the damage.” She described it to him like a brain running its traffic the long way around. Inefficiently.

“That’s why you’re having these energy crashes, your brain is on overdrive because it needs to be reorganized.”

It was hot, I opened the back doors and let the air move through. The cats milled, choosing whoever sat down.

“Our heart. Metabolism. Balance. Vision. Hearing. The way you laugh before you decide to. These *subconscious* functions of our brain are all happening beneath anything we can hear or think in our *conscious minds.*” he went on.

The accident had broken the wiring between those two layers.

The trick, Qasim had learned from Dr. Fong, was to flood the system. Force as many parts of the brain to work at once. With every region firing at the same time, the brain would be forced to rebuild the direct pathways it had lost, out of sheer need for efficiency. Then repetition. Repetition. Repetition.

We set to work.

---

One morning before the heat came up we strung the slack-line low between two trees in the backyard. San Diego summer temperatures had arrived two weeks after we got home.

Johnny took one side. I took the other. Qasim was at the fence.

All of us had our hands out ready to catch him.

He stepped on. Down. Stepped on again. Down.

Big Pearl, the smallish yoga instructor joined. Her nickname given so as not to be confuse with Rich and Katrina’s daughter little pearl. She came every week now, volunteering to take him through yogic flow routines and breathing exercises.

Between tries at the slack line, breath work. Rapid inhales. Deep exhale. Huge inhale. Hold. Oxygen explosions into his brain, the way the hyperbaric chambers had pushed it into mine.

To address his sight we wore a halloween pirate patch arrived over his left eye to try and retrain his vision. His periphery was not working, causing his head to rest at a permanent tilt.

“We’re both pirates now,” I said one day while he was focusing on standing on one foot.

“Concentrating,” he said, without laughter.

He held his thumb up and moved it out to the edge of where his vision gave up, then brought it back, reciting a math equation the whole way.

Then he juggled while doing more math problems or listing 5 names that begin with a letter c while I wafted intense smells of eucalyptus under his nose.

We were flooding the systems.

There were other sports too. Archery was about finding the same anchor point with each draw. We went to the gym each day to strengthen his neck and body back after the atrophy of the hospital.

He got five steps on the slack-line that day, and six the next.

By the end of the summer it would be fifteen, a moment where we danced around him like he had won the Olympics of life.

It would took dedication, repetition and time.

I called it a *everything-athalon*.

But then he started saying the questions that hurt.

“I cant wait to do a back flip again, ok maybe not backflips at first. But we can still hit rock jumps right?”

I had no idea how to respond. How do I address the idea of loss.

Every night, as the sun was setting we lay down side by side and ran a meditation that I had made up as we went.

Our minds would focus first from the top of the head, feeling the mental sweep flow down through our neck then down through the body and out the arms and legs, till finally each finger and each toe, pushing the tensions of the day out through them. “Feel the tingles where ever your mind is focused,” I told him, hoping the wires whose damage had originally left him paralyzed on the left side would be reformed with focused thought.

Then we would try to find the space between thoughts. The blank infinite illusive sensation felt like standing at the edge of a great abyss. The phosphenes danced across my unthinking mind, visual geometries that some archaeologist argue explain the oldest rock art, the patterns a mind makes in the dark ness. Something faint from the source of imagination. There in that space I could feel the magic of the stoke.

Finally, we listed what we were grateful for.

He listed everyone who had ever saved him, in order, in gratitude. It took some time.

We did the same thing at sunrise in the morning, but this time it would be the intentions for the day.

Head, arm tingling, fingers, infinite space in our minds, then. “My intentions today are to progress in my healing and to work on my helmet design and help pay this love forward.”

My intentions were to help him make peace with the injury through framework of intention and gratitude on either end of the day.

But it was doing more than that. His autonomic nervous system, the deep regulatory rhythm under heart rate, temperature, breath had been impacted. By simply lying together and breathing calmly, morning and night, he was retraining the metronome under everything else.

The timing was important, consistency was key.

We returned to the metronome of the nomad, living in the cadence of the sun.

Then I would build him a ridiculously giant omega3 loaded breakfast with piles of smoked salmon that he would eventually grow tired of. My boxes of supplements filled in the gaps. The body needed the right fuel.

As he chewed he would close his eyes to visualize the molecules healing his damaged axons. “tiny builders fixing tiny wires,” he told me.

Deena and Andrew had instructed him to do so, showing him a picture of an Omega3 molecule to imagine. I still couldn’t believe my son had the recovery tips of Olympic level wisdom to tap into. Deena had literally wrote the book *How to let the mind run.* (note fact check) [[CHECKED. The book is *Let Your Mind Run*, not *How to let the mind run*. Also “had literally wrote” should be “had literally written”. Separately, Ch21 still says Deena “set the world records, the American records”. She set fifteen American records simultaneously, from 5K to marathon. Her only world record is a masters record set at forty-one. And her TEDx talk calls her a three-time Olympic medalist, which is wrong too, she is a three-time Olympian with one medal, bronze in the 2004 Athens marathon.]]

---

Timescales continued normally for the rest of us while he seemed to accelerate.

“I feel like my third-grade self,” he told me one morning, frustrated by how small things made him angry. A few weeks later: “I think I’ve graduated to fifth grade.”

He was watching himself grow up from the inside, and reporting back.

You could hear it at the piano too. A music therapist came twice a week, and to both of our surprise he began learning entire compositions in minutes. He progressed fast, unburdened by habits and absorbing new things at speeds that startled everyone.

Each day had seemed to bring another function back online.

But now seemed like he was flying.

Still, I had no idea Charlie would be giving his own TEDx talk in a few months.

When school was out Millie began staying with me half of the time again, and it was wonderful.

Monarchs migrated through our yard that summer landing on the forest of milkweed plants Johnny and bought, clearing out the nurseries around San Diego. Every time one flew into the yard the kids would yell “Jamie!”

They would sit beside each other for long hours watching them in their cycles, keeping count. I thought of my own brother and sister and what they had meant to me growing up. Millie and Charlie needed each other.

Millie knew which milkweed had which caterpillar on which day, and pointed them out to Charlie when he forgot. He would stare at their tiny wiggles growing with each day until they would attach themselves onto leaves, shed their skins and morph into beautiful chrysalises.

I watched from the kitchen and saw my own two butterflies forming.

I had missed my daughter dearly.

The whole thing must have been hard on her, but she wore it with grace.

Every once in a while she and I would out alone for ice cream, kind of like those long drives with my father thorough the forest.

“Have you ever wondered where gravity comes from, like not what it is but actually where it comes from?” she asked one night.

“I have no idea,” I said. “We should ask grandpa.”

While my world had focused in this rebirth, my daughter was her own explorer.

When we were done, she always asked to bring a cone home for her brother.

A few times a week Kara and Diana came over and we played pantomime games in the living room, all five of us howling as Charlie acted out a fox or a refrigerator or a volcano. Millie always won, sending us into hysteria with her impressions. She was a natural actor, happy claiming “it came from my grandma!”

Sometimes other friends would join, Johnny would flop around on the floor like an idiot till someone yelled “FISH!” Even Bruna came to visit and did her best to pantomime a fridge.

After all that we had been through, divorce, break up, all of it. We were just one crew, forgiveness and love had let us see something bigger than ourselves. And the result was the capacity for joy between us all. We had to become better than the sum of our parts.

---

Other families, had started reaching out for advice when someone they loved had fallen to a TBI. Qasim had told Charlie how most people go through this depressed and alone, and the thought had imprinted on him.

“Dad you have a bunch of cameras, we could make something like our old home movies and share it so others can see hope.” It came from an innocence as pure as the describing the white void, just a kid functionalizing his empathy.

Nearly a decade earlier Mike Coots had shared his story in a way that had given me hope in my darkest hours, now my son wanted to pay that forward through sharing his.

I looked at Johnny, he turned toward me. “Let’s do it brother, I am in it.” Laura started raising funds and Hunter, a neighbored friend who had also been part of our connection to the mountain, jumped in on production and we started filming his recovery like a grand adventure.

My whole life I had made films of adventure, searching for stories of what it means to be human with crews that had become my friends all over the world. This one mattered the most.

That was when I saw what had been around us. Pearl on the mat. Qasim at the slackline. Rich with the gate. Ed at the archery field. The community calling from the mountains. Kara, Diana, Johnny, Laura, Hunter, all the many friends that had come to visit, and most of all Millie, they were the handprints on Charlie’s cave.

I had been standing in an exhibit hall trying to visualize the origins of human care when I received the call that began this all. Now I was living inside the very thing I had been looking for.

*Ecstasis per communitas.* The technology of healing had not changed.

---

But the oldest technology of all was not ours, it was Nature. This is what all my travels had shown me.

The Maya overlook at dawn, the monkeys starting up somewhere below and the mother tree standing over all of it. Surfing each morning as the sun rose. The dunes where I had remapped my brain with the help of a mushroom. Nature had been my biggest door to neural plasticity.

We would stand every day on the cliffs overlooking the Pacific, the same cliffs where Jamie had transcended. Our eyes gazed out to the horizon as the waves lapped toward us.

Terry Sejnowski at the Salk institute near my university had once told me the frequency of approaching waves could entrain brain waves the way binaural tones do. It was why I had played those frequencies around his head while he lay in the coma. Now the oceans waves were doing it through our eyes.

“In life you only get to choose what waves come, just how you face them,” I told him, repeating what Pohaku had shown me years before.

The fish became more active with the warming waters, and Charlie was noticeably good luck. First trip out was to a lake and a giant catfish found his line. He let it go.

“I am part of the flow of life!” he shouted through joyous laughter as it swam away.

Then out on the water. Yellowtail. White seabass. Johnny, a pro-level spearfisherman, prepared what we caught, and we lived off the bounty of the sea. We would stand on the beach with our feet in the sand, using sand crabs to target the fish that mingled in the surf. The waves lapped toward us in visual frequencies, the entrainment of our own brain waves falling into sync. Nature was healing us.

“I think this is the best summer of our lives,” Charlie said to us around a bowl of fresh ceviche.

---

We drove to our local desert.

The last time we had been there they were years younger, but it had always been special to us. Always a place we had gone through the thresholds of life.

I pulled into Aroyo Tapiado wash hoping the core memories of a childhood would still be beneath the surface.

Charlie helped me unload the camp chairs. Millie was already off on a hill, chasing something.

I took our guitars from the back and tuned them both the way I had tuned them with Jamie years before, the open drone.

Charlie’s fingers found their placements. I told him jokingly Jamie must have left him something when she pushed him back through the door of existence. But I wasn’t really joking. Every time he strummed, it felt like the source she always talked about was coming through.

The vast expanse, the rolling horizon, the smell of the campfire drew from his brain a flood of remembering, like water hidden just beneath the surface.

“I remember this spot, I remember shooting arrows with Milo and Derek.” Milo was Derek’s son and now my godson. They had ran through these hills with widdled spears as six year old boys long ago.

Millie returned with some rocks she had collected and examined their morphology under a microscope. “I found a tiny geode!” she exclaimed with happiness.

The sound of the open tuning moving through us.

---

But most of all he yearned for the mountains. This one was hard, and I was avoiding it.

They had been sacred to both of us, a place we had found ourselves and each other. But now they daunted me.

He wanted to run, jump, fly and one day ski again.

“I don’t get it, Dad. I was doing back flips on skis one second, and the next thing I know it’s summer and everyone is telling me I can’t walk up the stairs alone.”

When his teammates drove down from Mammoth to visit him he told everyone he’d be back on the snow by winter.

Knots tied in my stomach every time he said it. I didn’t know how to respond and stayed quiet until the visit was over

At first I wanted to tell him yes, the way I always had, that he could do anything. Then the terrifying image of another accident consumed me.

I told him, “I cant loose you again.”

“So your saying I cant follow my passion anymore?”

“I know son, but your brain is different now the drs said these injuries build upon each other, one bad hit and imagine loosing everything you have worked so hard to get back?! I am scared for you to jump in our back yard let alone on a mountain again.”

He looked me with eyes like I was breaking him.

“Dad, how can you say no, look at your life?!” He retorted.

“Look, I know you don’t have a memory of the accident, and those terrible days in the hospital when we didn’t know if you were going to live or die. But I do! The rest of us do. And it almost crushed us! How can you ask us to go back to that!?”

Then silence. The hypocrisy of my fatherly concerns filled the void. Isn’t that what I had done to everyone ten years before, to the very person I was talking to?

A deep sigh.

He had seen me chase giant waves, pack for the jungles and climb cliffs in search of lost cities with a prosthetic. Yet he and his sister had also been in the very same vehicle as me when it had been crushed me in front of their eyes.

“That wasn’t fair son, I am sorry.” I broke the silence.

“I am just afraid… But living in fear is not something I want either. We’ll just have to find a new way to approach everything. Let’s take it one day at a time,” I left it. How could I to say what was possible now?

Not long after he started working on new ideas to improve helmets, each morning sitting at the table researching biomimetic materials like the ones I had studied in college.

“Viscoelastic designs, that is what I need!” he would murmur as he worked the problem.

I found a contact with Giro a leading helmet manufacture. He met their head engineer, who compassionately showed Charlie stacks of designs and went through Charlie’s notebook where he kept his work. It had an adorable handwritten “do not touch” sketch on the cover.

It reminded me of the notebook I had carried around to pitch my dreams of the Valley of the Khans Project decades before.

“Passion is a word for one’s… life,” he had once told me in the hospital, before he knew what a cow was. I was seeing it in full now.

---

Five months and Charlie returned to school. His broader community embraced him like a hero.

They gave him earplugs at first because he couldn’t filter what was around him. “It’s like being constantly distracted by someone talking in the distance,” he told me. The simple act of listening was more cognitively interesting than I had realized, sorting foreground from background, voice from noise.

His school was project-based, and helmets became the project.

“I think I want to be a materials scientist, gamer, entrepreneur, pro skier,” he told me one night.

His grades started arriving, straight As. His teachers and doctor both used the word *miracle.*

Then one day Charlie came to me and said he was planning on do a TEDx talk. A friend’s parent had suggested it and he had taken writing it on all by himself.

It would be a good brain exercise I thought. On the other hand, he was deeply vulnerable, should I try to protect him from the feeling the anxiety of being on the stage? I knew the feeling well, the rush of exhilaration and terror right before stepping out in front of an audience was a sadistic addiction for me at this point. But this was his call.

I offered to help but wanted to tell his story in his own words.

Millie was backstage with a couple of their school friends, helping him run through his cue cards and his nerves, while I sat nervously in the audience with the rest of our family and crew as he took the stage.

He introduced himself.

“I was told to start with a joke about your topic, so I asked AI for a joke. And it replied

*There is absolutely nothing funny about brain injury. Under no circumstances should you tell a joke…*” Deadpan. “So I got nothing.”

Perfect delivery.

“There is something human about surviving though.”

The tension was broken.

Then he told us what he had found.

“There were nearly three million traumatic brain injury patients in the US each year.” He talked about the power of community, how no patient should have to go through it alone, how we could change the culture around it and the invisibility that it hid in.

And he told them about the bench, and the white void, and the feeling of love he had experienced as he was fighting for his life in a coma.

He honed in on a thought, “We don’t live reality, we create it.”

When he finished, the room cheered. I fell out of my seat clapping the way I had in the dugout at Millie’s first at bat. I hugged Kara and the others next to us, tears of joy streamed down our faces.
---

At six months from his rebirth we filmed an interview.

Charlie was radiant, strong, funny, sharp, unrecognizable from the boy who had been on life support half a year before. It felt triumphant.

But when the conversation moved to skiing, his expression changed.

I watched in real time as my son began to grieve the future he had built in his mind of becoming a pro skier, something he had shared with all his teammates. He had worn soda tabs from red bull and Yerba matte around his neck for a year, two sponsors he had dreamed of. His walls were covered in the posters of the mountains he had competed in, and he was actually on a team from a Mountain that had made Olympians. But while most kids could feel invincible, some part of him had begun to recognize that his risk were now different.

All summer long I had been keeping him from the mountains.

I had blamed it on the idea that we needed to stay at a stable altitude with maximum oxygen through his recovery, which was true. But there had been this growing tensions beneath it for me too. My heart ached at the idea of crushing his dreams, no matter what they were. Who would want to tell their kid they were limited. What if someone had told me I couldn’t be an Explorer after my own transformations.

And I understood his pain. The very first question that I had asked my Drs on the night of my accident was if I would ever surf again.

These things we did for fun, the ways in which we had played in nature, they were more than an activity. They were sacred to us, our identities, the ways we formed our relationships to the earth. They fulfilled a deep part of our human condition.

Then mid-thought, he stumbled through words, and out of the layers of his memory he recalled the exact moment that had drawn him to the mountains in the first place.

He was ten. We were on his first black diamond run. My brother Ed was there and others were watching as we dropped down the rocky chute under Chair One. He had faced it with us watching over him and we were all giggling all the way down.

“I think this has always just been about having fun with my dad,” he managed to get out through a choked voice while wiping his eyes. “I just need to get back to that. We’ll never lose that.”

I was a wreck in the corner, trying not to ruin his words with my sobs. I looked up at Johnny, doing his best to hold the camera. He was there too.

The foundation of our joy had never been the sport. It was the love between our family in those landscapes, and everything built on top of it was only a filter through which we got to feel that love.

With his words a secret wound filled in, the guilt I had carried subconsciously was that I was the one who had brought him to the thing that nearly took his life. But facing the mountain was no longer about skiing. It was about love. How could we let fear win over love.

The next morning we packed the car. The snow had yet to fall. But it was time to go.

---

“Take this with you,” Millie said while tying bracelets on our wrists. Over the years she used to tell me that when they fell off they had done their job of protecting me. Now she made them for both of us. She had her bestfriend’s birthday party that weekend and stayed home with Kara.

We drove north on our sacred road, the same one we had taken every Friday that winter, and so many times before. The summer was gone and the green of the hills was replaced by sage and gold. The cycles were turning.

When Mammoth appeared on the horizon, Charlie sat forward. No hesitation. Only a pull toward the place that had made him.

We passed the airport where I had heard the ventilator through the phone. The agony of that moment had haunted me. Then the river I had spent the winter on after Jamie died. Finally we turned left to our home mountain.

We found Deena, Piper, and Owen and his dad Scott first. Then the patrollers, the people who had saved his life. He had thanked them quietly every night for six months, but had never met. Now standing in front of them to say it out loud.

At their headquarters we sat down and they told him how that day had unfolded from their side. Oxygen on the way down. The life flight plane already on the tarmac. Critical moves in the first moments where every second had counted. “When it’s this serious, they often don’t make it back,” one of them said. Their training and execution may have been the difference in the margin.

We went to his team locker room, empty in the off-season. It was quiet and dark, almost ghostly. He stood in the doorway and looked at the space where his old life had happened. By this point he was grappling with the idea that this locker room had not changed but he had.

“Recovering is not about coming back, it’s about becoming,” he said to himself, more quietly than he had in the past.

Then we took the gondola to the summit. I sat next to him. At that altitude there were still a few small patches of snow. He reached down and brought the cold to his lips, Deena’s visualization from those first days in the hospital had come true.

That night, at a restaurant in town with the small group who had driven up with us, Rich, Johnny, Hunter, we ate and laughed and recounted stories of the adventures of the last six months.

But under it all you could tell Charlie was still processing the day, how close he really had come to death, those who had come together for him, and the change he was struggling to accept.

“So you saying it’s over. Team is my community, I cant have my community?”

The small talk stoped, I couldn’t fake some smooth answer that would make it all better and say it would all be fine. It was time to be real, with him and myself.

“This is a hard part of growing up,” I said. “Grief. There are stages to it, shock, denial, anger and acceptance and you are in those now. It’s uniquely hard when it’s some part of yourself that dies. I know. And we are here to help you face that together, but it’s up to you to choose what grows from this.”

I paused as internalized the thought.

“And you said it yourself, it was never about competing really, the love of community is all around you.”

He listened for a while. We talked more as he worked through his experience. You could see a transformation in his eyes.

Eventually he spoke.

“Maybe I had to accept loss to see what’s on the other side,” he smiled.

After that the energy at the table lighted. It was as if he had shed some phantom weight.

Then as we were leaving he said, “well if I cant join team, that means we can become powder chasers.”

We laughed, “one day at a time,” I said knowing the there was still healing ahead. But I was excited to help prove him right.

We walked out into the Owens valley after dinner. The giants of the Eastern Sierras rose all around us. The sky was dark, and then it wasn’t, a brightness building along the horizon so intense we mistook it for the dawn. Then the buck moon emerged, enormous and unhurried, and its light poured across the valley floor and turned the sagebrush silver. A herd of cows walked through our foreground, and somewhere in the distance, wolves started howling.

Many years before, in a ger, Amaraa had told me the Mongolian origin story. A blue wolf came down from the sky to a sacred mountain and met a white deer born from the earth, and from their union the first clans were born.

I thought of the duality of my kids, the winter’s wolf moon that Millie had been born to, the late summer sun that Charlie had been born under. Now wolves were singing in the valley in front of us, somewhere in the dark, the same primal echo returning time and time again.

The sound of their calls rolled across the open land, one voice joining another until the whole basin bathed in it. We sat in our camp chairs and listened. Then spontaneously we all started howling back. Our voices climbed into the night and mixed with the wolves and the moonlight and the mountain air, and whatever any of us had been carrying poured out and dissolved.

As I drifted to sleep Charlie journaled. The entry ended with a single line.

*I love you old Charlie, but it’s time for me to keep moving and finally I can let go.*

---

Before we left we drove down to the river. The water wound through the valley floor, rolling over rocks and bending into deep pools where trout had spawned through the cold months. Fall had left the grass thick on both banks, and bugs suspended above the current in bright clusters, catching the early light.

I handed Charlie the rod that I had earned after a summer long job I had had at his age. We pulled on our waders and stepped in.

I had been searching for a long time. Asking the same question everywhere I had been, though I didn’t always recognize it.

At one level it’s clear I was searching for what’s lost. Lost tomb, Lost leg, Lost Cities, lost love. But whats on the other side of loss is not just something to get back. The duality of loss and growth coexists as equal pairs of each other. Yin and yang. And to pass through the eye of that duality we are given a chance to discover who we are. Each time we do, in the dissolution of what we had been we can touch source of whatever it is at the bottom of everything.

What I had really been searching for was the source.

The source beneath it all.

But standing in the river with my son, I understood it had never really been hidden.

The Maya had called it *k’uh.* The Mongolians *hiimori.* Pohaku called it *mana.* Every culture had reached for the same space and found a different word. What its source was, I would never really know. But that collective reach was what connected us in our humanity.

I suspected, as a kid in my father’s car, listening to him explain the Big Bang as best as he could but told we had to accept no one could really see what happened before.

Yet it could be felt.

It was my mother who had first shown me how, at a piano bench, stopping my hands to tell me to feel the invisible. While my father searched the space between matter and antimatter. My mother had found it in the space between the notes. It took me most of my life to see they were describing the same thing. And it was not just about atoms and galaxies. It was in the consciousness that gives matter life. It was the capacity to care, to forgive, to choose creation in the face of destruction.

It was love.

I had felt it in the friendship of my life. In the gesture of a nomad passing a silver bowl of fermented milk to a stranger. In a boy who wanted to kiss everyone on the forehead, and the girl who pulled her brother’s shoes off and pressed his feet into the grass.

It was ancient. Older than handprints in the cave in borneo. And each time we came together, at some level it was because of the capacity to care that was within in us. Love.

But so was the capacity for the opposite. And the results of that struggle of duality were the stories I had seen across the world. The many flashes of us rising and falling in spectacular fashion each time. The door in the mountain that I had stood in front of years go, the ancient portal to the versions of humanity, it *was* in us.

I had felt it in sound. The resonance, om, always arriving at my thresholds.

The sound had passed through me, and now to my kids.

Charlie and I waded into the gentle currents.

I listened to the sound of the water, the sound of all of this, as it pressed against our bodies

He cast his line. The current took it past the rocks and through the morning light.

I looked at the cold water, at my two feet, one flesh and one carbon, and at his legs that six months ago couldn’t hold him at all. We watched the river move over us the way it moves over everything, with the patience it had always had. It had been there for me so many times before.

The seasons would turn and return in an infinite spiral of vortices, carrying what is given, returning what is needed.

Standing there in the rivers current, I heard every voice, every version of the boy beside me and the one that lives within me.

We watched.

The fly floated along the water as swirls rolled beneath it. Its tiny tuft of feather and fur lay just above the surface, in the plane between two realms.

The light of the sun cast through the shadows of the dark water.

Then a flash. His line went taut.

Charlie looked at me with excitement. For a moment I saw Millie at three, the same astonishment on her face when her first fish hit the line.

There was something on the other end.

---

END
